O. HENRY

The Gift of the Magi[11-1]


One dollar and eighty-seven cents. That was all. And sixty cents of it
was in pennies. Pennies saved one and two at a time by bulldozing the
grocer and the vegetable man and the butcher until one's cheeks burned
with the silent imputation of parsimony that such close dealing
implied. Three times Della counted it. One dollar and eighty-seven
cents. And the next day would be Christmas.

There was clearly nothing to do but flop down on the shabby little
couch and howl. So Della did it. Which instigates the moral reflection
that life is made up of sobs, sniffles, and smiles, with sniffles
predominating.

While the mistress of the home is gradually subsiding from the first
stage to the second, take a look at the home. A furnished flat at $8
per week. It did not exactly beggar description, but it certainly had
that word on the lookout for the mendicancy squad.

In the vestibule below was a letter-box into which no letter would go,
and an electric button from which no mortal finger could coax a ring.
Also appertaining thereunto was a card bearing the name "Mr. James
Dillingham Young."

The "Dillingham" had been flung to the breeze during a former period of
prosperity when its possessor was being paid $30 per week. Now, when
the income was shrunk to $20, the letters of "Dillingham" looked
blurred, as though they were thinking seriously of contracting to a
modest and unassuming D. But whenever Mr. James Dillingham Young came
home and reached his flat above he was called "Jim" and greatly hugged
by Mrs. James Dillingham Young, already introduced to you as Della.
Which is all very good.

Della finished her cry and attended her cheeks with the powder rag. She
stood by the window and looked out dully at a gray cat walking a gray
fence in a gray backyard. To-morrow would be Christmas Day, and she had
only $1.87 with which to buy Jim a present. She had been saving every
penny she could for months, with this result. Twenty dollars a week
doesn't go far. Expenses had been greater than she had calculated. They
always are. Only $1.87 to buy a present for Jim. Her Jim. Many a happy
hour she had spent planning for something nice for him. Something fine
and rare and sterling--something just a little bit near to being worthy
of the honor of being owned by Jim.

There was a pier-glass between the windows of the room. Perhaps you
have seen a pier-glass in an $8 flat. A very thin and very agile person
may, by observing his reflection in a rapid sequence of longitudinal
strips, obtain a fairly accurate conception of his looks. Della, being
slender, had mastered the art.

Suddenly she whirled from the window and stood before the glass. Her
eyes were shining brilliantly, but her face had lost its color within
twenty seconds. Rapidly she pulled down her hair and let it fall to its
full length.

Now, there were two possessions of the James Dillingham Youngs in which
they both took a mighty pride. One was Jim's gold watch that had been
his father's and his grandfather's. The other was Della's hair. Had the
Queen of Sheba[13-1] lived in the flat across the airshaft, Della would
have let her hair hang out the window some day to dry just to
depreciate Her Majesty's jewels and gifts. Had King Solomon been the
janitor, with all his treasures piled up in the basement, Jim would
have pulled out his watch every time he passed, just to see him pluck
at his beard from envy.

So now Della's beautiful hair fell about her, rippling and shining like
a cascade of brown waters. It reached below her knee and made itself
almost a garment for her. And then she did it up again nervously and
quickly. Once she faltered for a minute and stood still where a tear or
two splashed on the worn red carpet.

On went her old brown jacket; on went her old brown hat. With a whirl
of skirts and with the brilliant sparkle still in her eyes, she
fluttered out the door and down the stairs to the street.

Where she stopped the sign read: "Mme. Sofronie, Hair Goods of All
Kinds." One flight up Della ran, and collected herself, panting.
Madame, large, too white, chilly, hardly looked the "Sofronie."

"Will you buy my hair?" asked Della.

"I buy hair," said Madame. "Take yer hat off and let's have a sight at
the looks of it."

Down rippled the brown cascade.

"Twenty dollars," said Madame, lifting the mass with a practiced hand.

"Give it to me quick," said Della.

Oh, and the next two hours tripped by on rosy wings. Forget the hashed
metaphor. She was ransacking the stores for Jim's present.

She found it at last. It surely had been made for Jim and no one else.
There was no other like it in any of the stores, and she had turned all
of them inside out. It was a platinum fob chain, simple and chaste in
design, properly proclaiming its value by substance alone and not by
meretricious ornamentation--as all good things should do. It was even
worthy of The Watch. As soon as she saw it she knew that it must be
Jim's. It was like him. Quietness and value--the description applied to
both. Twenty-one dollars they took from her for it, and she hurried
home with the eighty-seven cents. With that chain on his watch Jim
might be properly anxious about the time in any company. Grand as the
watch was, he sometimes looked at it on the sly on account of the old
leather strap he used in place of a chain.

When Della reached home her intoxication gave way a little to prudence
and reason. She got out her curling irons and lighted the gas and went
to work repairing the ravages made by generosity added to love. Which
is always a tremendous task, dear friends--a mammoth task.

Within forty minutes her head was covered with tiny close-lying curls
that made her look wonderfully like a truant schoolboy. She looked at
her reflection in the mirror, long, carefully, and critically.

"If Jim doesn't kill me," she said to herself, "before he takes a
second look at me, he'll say I look like a Coney Island chorus girl.
But what could I do--Oh! what could I do with a dollar and eighty-seven
cents?"

At seven o'clock the coffee was made and the frying-pan was on the back
of the stove hot and ready to cook the chops.

Jim was never late. Della doubled the fob chain in her hand and sat on
the corner of the table near the door that he always entered. Then she
heard his step on the stair away down on the first flight, and she
turned white for just a moment. She had a habit of saying little silent
prayers about the simplest everyday things, and now she whispered:
"Please, God, make him think I am still pretty."

The door opened and Jim stepped in and closed it. He looked thin and
very serious. Poor fellow, he was only twenty-two--and to be burdened
with a family! He needed a new overcoat and he was without gloves.

Jim stopped inside the door, as immovable as a setter at the scent of
quail. His eyes were fixed upon Della, and there was an expression in
them that she could not read, and it terrified her. It was not anger,
nor surprise, nor disapproval, nor horror, nor any of the sentiments
that she had been prepared for. He simply stared at her fixedly with
that peculiar expression on his face.

Della wriggled off the table and went for him.

"Jim, darling," she cried, "don't look at me that way. I had my hair
cut off and sold it because I couldn't live through Christmas without
giving you a present. It'll grow out again--you won't mind, will you? I
just had to do it. My hair grows awfully fast. Say 'Merry Christmas,'
Jim, and let's be happy. You don't know what a nice--what a beautiful,
nice gift I've got for you."

"You've cut off your hair?" asked Jim laboriously, as if he had not
arrived at that patent fact yet, even after the hardest mental labor.

"Cut it off and sold it," said Della. "Don't you like me just as well,
anyhow? I'm me without my hair, ain't I?"

Jim looked about the room curiously.

"You say your hair is gone?" he said, with an air almost of idiocy.

"You needn't look for it," said Della. "It's sold, I tell you--sold and
gone, too. It's Christmas Eve, boy. Be good to me, for it went for you.
Maybe the hairs of my head were numbered," she went on with a sudden
serious sweetness, "but nobody could ever count my love for you. Shall
I put the chops on, Jim?"

Out of his trance Jim seemed quickly to wake. He enfolded his Della.
For ten seconds let us regard with discreet scrutiny some
inconsequential object in the other direction. Eight dollars a week or
a million a year--what is the difference? A mathematician or a wit
would give you the wrong answer. The magi brought valuable gifts but
that was not among them. This dark assertion will be illuminated later.

Jim drew a package from his overcoat pocket and threw it upon the
table.

"Don't make any mistake, Dell," he said, "about me. I don't think there
is anything in the way of a haircut or a shave or a shampoo that could
make me like my girl any less. But if you'll unwrap that package you
may see why you had me going a while at first."

White fingers and nimble tore at the string and paper. And then an
ecstatic scream of joy; and then, alas! a quick feminine change to
hysterical tears and wails, necessitating the immediate employment of
all the comforting powers of the lord of the flat.

For there lay The Combs--the set of combs, side and back, that Della
had worshipped for long in a Broadway window. Beautiful combs, pure
tortoise shell, with jewelled rims--just the shade to wear in the
beautiful vanished hair. They were expensive combs, she knew, and her
heart had simply craved and yearned over them without the least hope of
possession. And now, they were hers, but the tresses that should have
adorned the coveted adornments were gone.

But she hugged them to her bosom, and at length she was able to look up
with dim eyes and a smile and say: "My hair grows so fast, Jim!"

And then Della leaped up like a little singed cat and cried, "Oh, Oh!"

Jim had not yet seen his beautiful present. She held it out to him
eagerly upon her open palm. The dull precious metal seemed to flash
with a reflection of her bright and ardent spirit.

"Isn't it a dandy, Jim? I hunted all over town to find it. You'll have
to look at the time a hundred times a day now. Give me your watch. I
want to see how it looks on it."

Instead of obeying, Jim tumbled down on the couch and put his hand
under the back of his head and smiled.

"Dell," said he, "let's put our Christmas presents away and keep 'em a
while. They're too nice to use just at present. I sold the watch to get
the money to buy your combs. And now suppose you put the chops on."

The magi, as you know, were wise men--wonderfully wise men--who brought
gifts to the Babe in the manger. They invented the art of giving
Christmas presents. Being wise, their gifts were no doubt wise ones,
possibly bearing the privilege of exchange in case of duplication. And
here I have lamely related to you the uneventful chronicle of two
foolish children in a flat who most unwisely sacrificed for each other
the greatest treasures of their house. But in a last word to the wise
of these days let it be said that of all who give gifts these two were
the wisest. Of all who give and receive gifts, such as they are wisest.
Everywhere they are the wisest. They are the magi.




BOOTH TARKINGTON

A Reward of Merit


I

Penrod and Sam made a gloomy discovery one morning in mid-October. All
the week had seen amiable breezes and fair skies until Saturday, when,
about breakfast-time, the dome of heaven filled solidly with gray vapor
and began to drip. The boys' discovery was that there is no justice
about the weather.

They sat in the carriage-house of the Schofields' empty stable; the
doors upon the alley were open, and Sam and Penrod stared torpidly at
the thin but implacable drizzle which was the more irritating because
there was barely enough of it to interfere with a number of things they
had planned to do.

"Yes; this is _nice_!" Sam said, in a tone of plaintive sarcasm. "This
is a _perty_ way to do!" (He was alluding to the personal spitefulness
of the elements.) "I'd like to know what's the sense of it--ole sun
pourin' down every day in the week when nobody needs it, then cloud up
and rain all Saturday! My father said it's goin' to be a three days'
rain."

"Well, nobody with any sense cares if it rains Sunday and Monday," said
Penrod. "I wouldn't care if it rained every Sunday as long as I lived;
but I just like to know what's the reason it had to go and rain to-day.
Got all the days o' the week to choose from and goes and picks on
Saturday. That's a fine biz'nuss!"

"Well, in vacation----" Sam began, but at a sound from a source
invisible to him he paused. "What's that?" he said, somewhat startled.

It was a curious sound, loud and hollow and unhuman, yet it seemed to
be a cough. Both boys rose, and Penrod asked uneasily, "Where'd that
noise come from?"

"It's in the alley," said Sam.

Perhaps if the day had been bright, both of them would have stepped
immediately to the alley doors to investigate; but their actual
procedure was to move a little distance in the opposite direction. The
strange cough sounded again.

"_Say!_" Penrod quavered. "What _is_ that?"

Then both boys uttered smothered exclamations and jumped, for the long,
gaunt head which appeared in the doorway was entirely unexpected. It
was the cavernous and melancholy head of an incredibly thin, old,
whitish horse. This head waggled slowly from side to side; the nostrils
vibrated; the mouth opened, and the hollow cough sounded again.

Recovering themselves, Penrod and Sam underwent the customary human
reaction from alarm to indignation.

"What you want, you ole horse, you?" Penrod shouted. "Don't you come
coughin' around _me_!"

And Sam, seizing a stick, hurled it at the intruder.

"Get out o' here!" he roared.

The aged horse nervously withdrew his head, turned tail, and made a
rickety flight up the alley, while Sam and Penrod, perfectly obedient
to inherited impulse,[21-1] ran out into the drizzle and uproariously
pursued. They were but automatons of instinct,[21-2] meaning no evil.
Certainly they did not know the singular and pathetic history of the
old horse who had wandered into the alley and ventured to look through
the open door.

This horse, about twice the age of either Penrod or Sam, had lived to
find himself in a unique position. He was nude, possessing neither
harness nor halter; all he had was a name, Whitey, and he would have
answered to it by a slight change of expression if any one had thus
properly addressed him. So forlorn was Whitey's case, he was actually
an independent horse; he had not even an owner. For two days and a half
he had been his own master.

Previous to that period he had been the property of one Abalene Morris,
a person of color, who would have explained himself as engaged in the
hauling business. On the contrary, the hauling business was an
insignificant side line with Mr. Morris, for he had long ago given
himself, as utterly as fortune permitted, to that talent which, early
in youth, he had recognized as the greatest of all those surging in his
bosom. In his waking thoughts and in his dreams, in health and in
sickness, Abalene Morris was the dashing and emotional practitioner of
an art[22-1] probably more than Roman in antiquity. Abalene was a
crap-shooter. The hauling business was a disguise.

A concentration of events had brought it about that, at one and the
same time, Abalene, after a dazzling run of the dice, found the hauling
business an actual danger to the preservation of his liberty. He won
seventeen dollars and sixty cents, and within the hour found himself in
trouble with an officer of the Humane Society on account of an
altercation with Whitey. Abalene had been offered four dollars for
Whitey some ten days earlier; wherefore he at once drove to the shop of
the junk-dealer who had made the offer and announced his acquiescence
in the sacrifice.

"_No_, suh!" said the junk-dealer, with emphasis. "I awready done got
me a good mule fer my deliv'ry-hoss, 'n'at ole Whitey hoss ain' wuff no
fo' dollah nohow! I 'uz a fool when I talk 'bout th'owin' money roun'
that a-way. I know what _you_ up to, Abalene. Man come by here li'l bit
ago tole me all 'bout white man try to 'rest you, ovah on the avvynoo.
Yessuh; he say white man goin' to git you yit an' th'ow you in jail
'count o' Whitey. White man tryin' to fine out who you _is_. He say,
nemmine, he'll know Whitey ag'in, even if he don' know you! He say he
ketch you by the hoss; so you come roun' tryin' fix me up with Whitey
so white man grab me, th'ow _me_ in 'at jail. G'on 'way f'um hyuh, you
Abalene! You cain' sell an' you cain' give Whitey to no cullud man 'in
'is town. You go an' drowned 'at ole hoss, 'cause you sutny goin' to
jail if you git ketched drivin' him."

The substance of this advice seemed good to Abalene, especially as the
seventeen dollars and sixty cents in his pocket lent sweet colors to
life out of jail at this time. At dusk he led Whitey to a broad common
at the edge of town, and spoke to him finally.

"G'on 'bout you biz'nis," said Abalene; "you ain' _my_ hoss. Don' look
roun' at me, 'cause _I_ ain' got no 'quaintance wif you. I'm a man o'
money, an' I got my own frien's; I'm a-lookin' fer bigger cities, hoss.
You got you' biz'nis an' I got mine. Mista' Hoss, good-night!"

Whitey found a little frosted grass upon the common and remained there
all night. In the morning he sought the shed where Abalene had kept
him, but that was across the large and busy town, and Whitey was
hopelessly lost. He had but one eye; a feeble one; and his legs were
not to be depended upon; but he managed to cover a great deal of
ground, to have many painful little adventures, and to get monstrously
hungry and thirsty before he happened to look in upon Penrod and Sam.

When the two boys chased him up the alley, they had no intention to
cause pain; they had no intention at all. They were no more cruel than
Duke, Penrod's little old dog, who followed his own instincts, and,
making his appearance hastily through a hole in the back fence, joined
the pursuit with sound and fury. A boy will nearly always run after
anything that is running, and his first impulse is to throw a stone at
it. This is a survival of primeval man, who must take every chance to
get his dinner. So, when Penrod and Sam drove the hapless Whitey up the
alley, they were really responding to an impulse thousands and
thousands of years old--an impulse founded upon the primordial
observation that whatever runs is likely to prove edible. Penrod and
Sam were not "bad"; they were never that. They were something which was
not their fault; they were historic.

At the next corner Whitey turned to the right into the cross-street;
thence, turning to the right again and still warmly pursued, he
zigzagged down a main thoroughfare until he reached another
cross-street, which ran alongside the Schofields' yard and brought him
to the foot of the alley he had left behind in his flight. He entered
the alley, and there his dim eye fell upon the open door he had
previously investigated. No memory of it remained, but the place had a
look associated in his mind with hay, and as Sam and Penrod turned the
corner of the alley in panting yet still vociferous pursuit, Whitey
stumbled up the inclined platform before the open doors, staggered
thunderously across the carriage-house and through another open door
into a stall, an apartment vacant since the occupancy of Mr.
Schofield's last horse, now several years deceased.


II

The two boys shrieked with excitement as they beheld the coincidence of
this strange return. They burst into the stable, making almost as much
noise as Duke, who had become frantic at the invasion. Sam laid hands
upon a rake.

"You get out o' there, you ole horse, you!" he bellowed. "I ain't
afraid to drive him out. I----"

"_Wait_ a minute!" shouted Penrod. "Wait till I----"

Sam was manfully preparing to enter the stall.

"You hold the doors open," he commanded, "so's they won't blow shut and
keep him in here. I'm goin' to hit him with----"

"Quee-_yut_!" Penrod shouted, grasping the handle of the rake so that
Sam could not use it. "Wait a _minute_, can't you?" He turned with
ferocious voice and gestures upon Duke. "_Duke!_" And Duke, in spite of
his excitement, was so impressed that he prostrated himself in silence,
and then unobtrusively withdrew from the stable. Penrod ran to the
alley doors and closed them.

"My gracious!" Sam protested. "What you goin' to do?"

"I'm goin' to keep this horse," said Penrod, whose face showed the
strain of a great idea.

"What _for_?"

"For the reward," said Penrod simply.

Sam sat down in the wheelbarrow and stared at his friend almost with
awe.

"My gracious," he said, "I never thought o' that! How--how much do you
think we'll get, Penrod?"

Sam's thus admitting himself to a full partnership in the enterprise
met no objection from Penrod, who was absorbed in the contemplation of
Whitey.

"Well," he said judicially, "we might get more and we might get less."

Sam rose and joined his friend in the doorway opening upon the two
stalls. Whitey had preempted the nearer, and was hungrily nuzzling the
old frayed hollows in the manger.

"May be a hundred dollars--or sumpthing?" Sam asked in a low voice.

Penrod maintained his composure and repeated the new-found expression
which had sounded well to him a moment before. He recognized it as a
symbol of the non-committal attitude that makes people looked up to.
"Well"--he made it slow, and frowned--"we might get more and we might
get less."

"More'n a hundred _dollars_?" Sam gasped.

"Well," said Penrod, "we might get more and we might get less." This
time, however, he felt the need of adding something. He put a question
in an indulgent tone, as though he were inquiring, not to add to his
own information but to discover the extent of Sam's. "How much do you
think horses are worth, anyway?"

"I don't know," said Sam frankly, and, unconsciously, he added, "They
might be more and they might be less."

"Well, when our ole horse died," said Penrod, "papa said he wouldn't
taken five hundred dollars for him. That's how much _horses_ are
worth!"

"My gracious!" Sam exclaimed. Then he had a practical afterthought.
"But maybe he was a better horse than this'n. What color was he?"

"He was bay. Looky here, Sam"--and now Penrod's manner changed from the
superior to the eager--"you look what kind of horses they have in a
circus, and you bet a circus has the _best_ horses, don't it? Well,
what kind of horses do they have in a circus? They have some black and
white ones, but the best they have are white all over. Well, what kind
of a horse is this we got here? He's perty near white right now, and I
bet if we washed him off and got him fixed up nice he _would_ be white.
Well, a bay horse is worth five hundred dollars, because that's what
papa said, and this horse----"

Sam interrupted rather timidly.

"He--he's awful bony, Penrod. You don't guess that'd make any----"

Penrod laughed contemptuously.

"Bony! All he needs is a little food and he'll fill right up and look
good as ever. You don't know much about horses, Sam, I expect. Why,
_our_ ole horse----"

"Do you expect he's hungry now?" asked Sam, staring at Whitey.

"Let's try him," said Penrod. "Horses like hay and oats the best, but
they'll eat most anything."

"I guess they will. He's tryin' to eat that manger up right now, and I
bet it ain't good for him."

"Come on," said Penrod, closing the door that gave entrance to the
stalls. "We got to get this horse some drinkin'-water and some good
food."

They tried Whitey's appetite first with an autumnal branch which they
wrenched from a hardy maple in the yard. They had seen horses nibble
leaves, and they expected Whitey to nibble the leaves of this branch,
but his ravenous condition did not allow him time for cool
discriminations. Sam poked the branch at him from the passageway, and
Whitey, after one backward movement of alarm, seized it venomously.
"Here! You stop that!" Sam shouted. "You stop that, you ole horse,
you!"

"What's the matter?" called Penrod from the hydrant, where he was
filling a bucket. "What's he doin' now?"

"Doin'! He's eatin' the wood part, too! He's chewin' up sticks as big
as baseball bats! He's crazy!"

Penrod rushed to see this sight, and stood aghast.

"Take it away from him, Sam!" he commanded sharply.

"Go on, take it away from him yourself!" was the prompt retort of his
comrade.

"You had no biz'nuss to give it to him," said Penrod. "Anybody with any
sense ought to know it'd make him sick. What'd you want to go and give
it to him for?"

"Well, you didn't say not to."

"Well, what if I didn't? I never said I did, did I? You go on in that
stall and take it away from him."

"_Yes_, I will!" Sam returned bitterly. Then, as Whitey had dragged the
remains of the branch from the manger to the floor of the stall, Sam
scrambled to the top of the manger and looked over. "There ain't much
left to _take_ away! He's swallered it all except some splinters.
Better give him the water to try and wash it down with." And, as Penrod
complied, "My gracious, look at that horse _drink_!"

They gave Whitey four buckets of water, and then debated the question
of nourishment. Obviously, this horse could not be trusted with
branches, and, after getting their knees black and their backs sodden,
they gave up trying to pull enough grass to sustain him. Then Penrod
remembered that horses like apples, both "cooking-apples" and
"eating-apples," and Sam mentioned the fact that every autumn his
father received a barrel of "cooking-apples" from a cousin who owned a
farm. That barrel was in the Williams' cellar now, and the cellar was
providentially supplied with "outside doors," so that it could be
visited without going through the house. Sam and Penrod set forth for
the cellar.

They returned to the stable bulging, and, after a discussion of
Whitey's digestion (Sam claiming that eating the core and seeds, as
Whitey did, would grow trees in his inside), they went back to the
cellar for supplies again--and again. They made six trips, carrying
each time a capacity cargo of apples, and still Whitey ate in a
famished manner. They were afraid to take more apples from the barrel,
which began to show conspicuously the result of their raids, wherefore
Penrod made an unostentatious visit to the cellar of his own house.
From the inside he opened a window and passed vegetables out to Sam,
who placed them in a bucket and carried them hurriedly to the stable,
while Penrod returned in a casual manner through the house. Of his
_sang-froid_[30-1] under a great strain it is sufficient to relate
that, in the kitchen, he said suddenly to Della, the cook, "Oh, look
behind you!" and by the time Della discovered that there was nothing
unusual behind her, Penrod was gone, and a loaf of bread from the
kitchen table was gone with him.

Whitey now ate nine turnips, two heads of lettuce, one cabbage, eleven
raw potatoes, and the loaf of bread. He ate the loaf of bread last and
he was a long time about it; so the boys came to a not unreasonable
conclusion.

"Well, sir, I guess we got him filled up at last!" said Penrod. "I bet
he wouldn't eat a saucer of ice-cream now, if we'd give it to him!"

"He looks better to me," said Sam, staring critically at Whitey. "I
think he's kind of begun to fill out some. I expect he must like us,
Penrod; we been doin' a good deal for this horse."

"Well, we got to keep it up," Penrod insisted rather pompously. "Long
as _I_ got charge o' this horse, he's goin' to get good treatment."

"What we better do now, Penrod?"

Penrod took on the outward signs of deep thought.

"Well, there's plenty to _do_, all right. I got to think."

Sam made several suggestions, which Penrod--maintaining his air of
preoccupation--dismissed with mere gestures.

"Oh, _I_ know!" Sam cried finally. "We ought to wash him so's he'll
look whiter'n what he does now. We can turn the hose on him acrost the
manger."

"No; not yet," said Penrod. "It's too soon after his meal. You ought to
know that yourself. What we got to do is to make up a bed for him--if
he wants to lay down or anything."

"Make up a what for him?" Sam echoed, dumfounded. "What you talkin'
about? How can----"

"Sawdust," said Penrod. "That's the way the horse we used to have used
to have it. We'll make this horse's bed in the other stall, and then he
can go in there and lay down whenever he wants to."

"How we goin' to do it?"

"Look, Sam; there's the hole into the sawdust-box! All you got to do is
walk in there with the shovel, stick the shovel in the hole till it
gets full of sawdust, and then sprinkle it around on the empty stall."

"All _I_ got to do!" Sam cried. "What are you goin' to do?"

"I'm goin' to be right here," Penrod answered reassuringly. "He won't
kick or anything, and it isn't goin' to take you half a second to slip
around behind him to the other stall."

"What makes you think he won't kick?"

"Well, I _know_ he won't, and, besides, you could hit him with the
shovel if he tried to. Anyhow, I'll be right here, won't I?"

"I don't care where you are," Sam said earnestly. "What difference
would that make if he ki----"

"Why, you were goin' right in the stall," Penrod reminded him. "When he
first came in, you were goin' to take the rake and----"

"I don't care if I was," Sam declared. "I was excited then."

"Well, you can get excited now, can't you?" his friend urged. "You can
just as easy get----"

He was interrupted by a shout from Sam, who was keeping his eye upon
Whitey throughout the discussion.

"Look! Looky there!" And undoubtedly renewing his excitement, Sam
pointed at the long, gaunt head beyond the manger. It was disappearing
from view. "Look!" Sam shouted. "He's layin' down!"

"Well, then," said Penrod, "I guess he's goin' to take a nap. If he
wants to lay down without waitin' for us to get the sawdust fixed for
him, that's his lookout, not ours."

On the contrary, Sam perceived a favorable opportunity for action.

"I just as soon go and make his bed up while he's layin' down," he
volunteered. "You climb up on the manger and watch him, Penrod, and
I'll sneak in the other stall and fix it all up nice for him, so's he
can go in there any time when he wakes up, and lay down again, or
anything; and if he starts to get up, you holler and I'll jump out over
the other manger."

Accordingly, Penrod established himself in a position to observe the
recumbent figure. Whitey's breathing was rather labored but regular,
and, as Sam remarked, he looked "better," even in his slumber. It is
not to be doubted that, although Whitey was suffering from a light
attack of colic, his feelings were in the main those of contentment.
After trouble, he was solaced; after exposure, he was sheltered; after
hunger and thirst, he was fed and watered. He slept.

The noon whistles blew before Sam's task was finished, but by the time
he departed for lunch there was made a bed of such quality that Whitey
must needs have been born faultfinder if he complained of it. The
friends parted, each urging the other to be prompt in returning, but
Penrod got into threatening difficulties as soon as he entered the
house.


III

"Penrod," said his mother, "what did you do with that loaf of bread
Della says you took from the table?"

"Ma'am? _What_ loaf o' bread?"

"I believe I can't let you go outdoors this afternoon," Mrs. Schofield
said severely. "If you were hungry, you know perfectly well all you had
to do was to----"

"But I wasn't hungry; I----"

"You can explain later," said Mrs. Schofield. "You'll have all
afternoon."

Penrod's heart grew cold.

"I _can't_ stay in," he protested. "I've asked Sam Williams to come
over."

"I'll telephone Mrs. Williams."

"Mamma!" Penrod's voice became agonized. "I _had_ to give that bread to
a--to a poor ole man. He was starving and so were his children and his
wife. They were all just _starving_--and they couldn't wait while I
took time to come and ask you, mamma. I _got_ to go outdoors this
afternoon. I _got_ to! Sam's----"

She relented.

In the carriage-house, half an hour later, Penrod gave an account of
the episode.

"Where'd we been, I'd just like to know," he concluded, "if I hadn't
got out here this afternoon?"

"Well, I guess I could managed him all right," said Sam. "I was in the
passageway, a minute ago, takin' a look at him. He's standin' up agin.
I expect he wants more to eat."

"Well, we got to fix about that," said Penrod. "But what I mean--if I'd
had to stay in the house, where would we been about the most important
thing in the whole biz'nuss?"

"What you talkin' about?"

"Well, why can't you wait till I tell you?" Penrod's tone had become
peevish. For that matter, so had Sam's; they were developing one of the
little differences, or quarrels, that composed the very texture of
their friendship.

"Well, why don't you tell me, then?"

"Well, how can I?" Penrod demanded. "You keep talkin' every minute."

"I'm not talkin' _now_, am I?" Sam protested. "You can tell me _now_,
can't you? I'm not talk----"

"You are, too!" shouted Penrod. "You talk all the time! You----"

He was interrupted by Whitey's peculiar cough. Both boys jumped and
forgot their argument.

"He means he wants some more to eat, I bet," said Sam.

"Well, if he does, he's got to wait," Penrod declared. "We got to get
the most important thing of all fixed up first."

"What's that, Penrod?"

"The reward," said Penrod mildly. "That's what I was tryin' to tell you
about, Sam, if you'd ever give me half a chance."

"Well, I _did_ give you a chance. I kept _tellin'_ you to tell me,
but----"

"You never! You kept sayin'----"

They renewed this discussion, protracting it indefinitely; but as each
persisted in clinging to his own interpretation of the facts, the
question still remains unsettled. It was abandoned, or rather, it
merged into another during the later stages of the debate, this other
being concerned with which of the debaters had the least "sense." Each
made the plain statement that if he were more deficient than his
opponent in that regard, self-destruction would be his only refuge.
Each declared that he would "rather die than be talked to death"; and
then, as the two approached a point bluntly recriminative, Whitey
coughed again, whereupon they were miraculously silent, and went into
the passageway in a perfectly amiable manner.

"I got to have a good look at him, for once," said Penrod, as he stared
frowningly at Whitey. "We got to fix up about that reward."

"I want to take a good ole look at him myself," said Sam.

After supplying Whitey with another bucket of water, they returned to
the carriage-house and seated themselves thoughtfully. In truth, they
were something a shade more than thoughtful; the adventure to which
they had committed themselves was beginning to be a little
overpowering. If Whitey had been a dog, a goat, a fowl, or even a stray
calf, they would have felt equal to him; but now that the earlier glow
of their wild daring had disappeared, vague apprehensions stirred.
Their "good look" at Whitey had not reassured them--he seemed large,
Gothic,[36-1] and unusual.

Whisperings within them began to urge that for boys to undertake an
enterprise connected with so huge an animal as an actual horse was
perilous. Beneath the surface of their musings, dim but ominous
prophecies moved; both boys began to have the feeling that, somehow,
this affair was going to get beyond them and that they would be in
heavy trouble before it was over--they knew not why. They knew why no
more than they knew why they felt it imperative to keep the fact of
Whitey's presence in the stable a secret from their respective
families, but they did begin to realize that keeping a secret of that
size was going to be attended with some difficulty. In brief, their
sensations were becoming comparable to those of the man who stole a
house.

Nevertheless, after a short period given to unspoken misgivings, they
returned to the subject of the reward. The money-value of bay horses,
as compared to white, was again discussed, and each announced his
certainty that nothing less than "a good ole hundred dollars" would be
offered for the return of Whitey.

But immediately after so speaking they fell into another silence, due
to sinking feelings. They had spoken loudly and confidently, and yet
they knew, somehow, that such things were not to be. According to their
knowledge, it was perfectly reasonable to suppose that they would
receive this fortune, but they frightened themselves in speaking of it;
they knew that they _could_ not have a hundred dollars for their
own. An oppression, as from something awful and criminal, descended
upon them at intervals.

Presently, however, they were warmed to a little cheerfulness again by
Penrod's suggestion that they should put a notice in the paper. Neither
of them had the slightest idea how to get it there, but such details as
that were beyond the horizon; they occupied themselves with the
question of what their advertisement ought to "say." Finding that they
differed irreconcilably, Penrod went to a cache of his in the
sawdust-box and brought two pencils and a supply of paper. He gave one
of the pencils and several sheets to Sam; then both boys bent
themselves in silence to the labor of practical composition. Penrod
produced the briefer paragraph. (See Fig. I.) Sam's was more ample.
(See Fig. II.)

[Illustration: FIG I]

[Illustration: FIG II]

Neither Sam nor Penrod showed any interest in what the other had
written, but both felt that something praiseworthy had been
accomplished. Penrod exhaled a sigh, as of relief, and, in a manner he
had observed his father use sometimes, he said:

"Thank goodness, _that's_ off my mind, anyway!"

"What we goin' do next, Penrod?" Sam asked deferentially, the borrowed
manner having some effect upon him.

"I don't know what _you're_ goin' to do," Penrod returned, picking up
the old cigar box which had contained the paper and pencils. _"I'm_
goin' to put mine in here, so's it'll come in handy when I haf to get
at it."

"Well, I guess I'll keep mine there, too," said Sam. Thereupon he
deposited his scribbled slip beside Penrod's in the cigar box, and the
box was solemnly returned to the secret place whence it had been taken.

"There, _that's_ 'tended to!" said Sam, and, unconsciously imitating
his friend's imitation, he gave forth audibly a breath of satisfaction
and relief. Both boys felt that the financial side of their great
affair had been conscientiously looked to, that the question of the
reward was settled, and that everything was proceeding in a
businesslike manner. Therefore, they were able to turn their attention
to another matter.

This was the question of Whitey's next meal. After their exploits of
the morning, and the consequent imperilment of Penrod, they decided
that nothing more was to be done in apples, vegetables, or bread; it
was evident that Whitey must be fed from the bosom of nature.

"We couldn't pull enough o' that frostbit ole grass in the yard to feed
him," Penrod said gloomily. "We could work a week and not get enough to
make him swaller more'n about twice. All we got this morning, he blew
most of it away. He'd try to scoop it in toward his teeth with his lip,
and then he'd haf to kind of blow out his breath, and after that all
the grass that'd be left was just some wet pieces stickin' to the
outsides of his face. Well, and you know how he acted about that maple
branch. We can't trust him with branches."

Sam jumped up.

"_I_ know!" he cried. "There's lots of leaves left on the branches. We
can give them to him."

"I just said----"

"I don't mean the branches," Sam explained. "We'll leave the branches
on the trees, but just pull the leaves off the branches and put 'em in
the bucket and feed 'em to him out the bucket."

Penrod thought this plan worth trying, and for three-quarters of an
hour the two boys were busy with the lower branches of various trees in
the yard. Thus they managed to supply Whitey with a fair quantity of
wet leaves, which he ate in a perfunctory way, displaying little of his
earlier enthusiasm. And the work of his purveyors might have been more
tedious if it had been less damp, for a boy is seldom bored by anything
that involves his staying-out in the rain without protection. The
drizzle had thickened; the leaves were heavy with water, and at every
jerk the branches sent fat drops over the two collectors. They attained
a noteworthy state of sogginess.

Finally, they were brought to the attention of the authorities indoors,
and Della appeared upon the back porch.

"Musther Penrod," she called, "y'r mamma says ye'll c'm in the house
this minute an' change y'r shoes an' stockin's an' everythun' else ye
got on! D'ye hear me?"

Penrod, taken by surprise and unpleasantly alarmed, darted away from
the tree he was depleting and ran for the stable.

"You tell her I'm dry as toast!" he shouted over his shoulder.

Della withdrew, wearing the air of a person gratuitously insulted; and
a moment later she issued from the kitchen, carrying an umbrella. She
opened it and walked resolutely to the stable.

"She says I'm to bring ye in the house," said Della, "an' I'm goin' to
bring ye!"

Sam had joined Penrod in the carriage-house, and, with the beginnings
of an unnamed terror, the two beheld this grim advance. But they did
not stay for its culmination. Without a word to each other they
hurriedly tiptoed up the stairs to the gloomy loft, and there they
paused, listening.

They heard Della's steps upon the carriage-house floor.

"Ah, there's plenty places t'hide in," they heard her say; "but I'll
show ye! She tole me to bring ye, and I'm----"

She was interrupted by a peculiar sound--loud, chilling, dismal, and
unmistakably not of human origin. The boys knew it for Whitey's cough,
but Della had not their experience. A smothered shriek reached their
ears; there was a scurrying noise, and then, with horror, they heard
Della's footsteps in the passageway that ran by Whitey's manger.
Immediately there came a louder shriek, and even in the anguish of
knowing their secret discovered, they were shocked to hear distinctly
the words, "O Lard in hivvin!" in the well-known voice of Della. She
shrieked again, and they heard the rush of her footfalls across the
carriage-house floor. Wild words came from the outer air, and the
kitchen door slammed violently. It was all over. She had gone to
"tell."

Penrod and Sam plunged down the stairs and out of the stable. They
climbed the back fence and fled up the alley. They turned into Sam's
yard, and, without consultation, headed for the cellar doors, nor
paused till they found themselves in the farthest, darkest, and
gloomiest recess of the cellar. There, perspiring, stricken with fear,
they sank down upon the earthen floor, with their moist backs against
the stone wall.

Thus with boys. The vague apprehensions that had been creeping upon
Penrod and Sam all afternoon had become monstrous; the unknown was
before them. How great their crime would turn out to be (now that it
was in the hands of grown people), they did not know, but, since it
concerned a horse, it would undoubtedly be considered of terrible
dimensions.

Their plans for a reward, and all the things that had seemed both
innocent and practical in the morning, now staggered their minds as
manifestations of criminal folly. A new and terrible light seemed to
play upon the day's exploits; they had chased a horse belonging to
strangers, and it would be said that they deliberately drove him into
the stable and there concealed him. They had, in truth, virtually
stolen him, and they had stolen food for him. The waning light through
the small window above them warned Penrod that his inroads upon the
vegetables in his own cellar must soon be discovered. Della, that
Nemesis,[43-1] would seek them in order to prepare them for dinner, and
she would find them not. But she would recall his excursion to the
cellar, for she had seen him when he came up; and also the truth would
be known concerning the loaf of bread. Altogether, Penrod felt that his
case was worse than Sam's--until Sam offered a suggestion which roused
such horrible possibilitites concerning the principal item of their
offense that all thought of the smaller indictments disappeared.

"Listen, Penrod," Sam quavered: "What--what if that--what if that ole
horse maybe b'longed to a--policeman!" Sam's imagination was not of the
comforting kind. "What'd they--do to us, Penrod, if it turned out he
was some policeman's horse?"

Penrod was able only to shake his head. He did not reply in words, but
both boys thenceforth considered it almost inevitable that Whitey _had_
belonged to a policeman, and in their sense of so ultimate a disaster,
they ceased for a time to brood upon what their parents would probably
do to them. The penalty for stealing a policeman's horse would be only
a step short of capital, they were sure. They would not be hanged; but
vague, looming sketches of something called the penitentiary began to
flicker before them.

It grew darker in the cellar, so that finally they could not see each
other.

"I guess they're huntin' for us by now," Sam said huskily. "I don't--I
don't like it much down here, Penrod."

Penrod's hoarse whisper came from the profound gloom:

"Well, who ever said you did?"

"Well----" Sam paused; then he said plaintively, "I wish we'd never
_seen_ that dern ole horse."

"It was every bit his fault," said Penrod. "_We_ didn't do anything. If
he hadn't come stickin' his ole head in our stable, it'd never happened
at all. Ole fool!" He rose. "I'm goin' to get out of here; I guess I've
stood about enough for one day."

"Where--where you goin', Penrod? You aren't goin' _home_, are you?"

"No; I'm not! What do you take me for? You think I'm crazy?"

"Well, where _can_ you go?"

How far Penrod's desperation actually would have led him is doubtful,
but he made this statement:

"I don't know where _you're_ goin', but _I'm_ goin' to walk straight
out in the country till I come to a farm-house and say my name's George
and live there!"

"I'll do it, too," Sam whispered eagerly. "I'll say my name's Henry."

"Well, we better get started," said the executive Penrod. "We got to
get away from here, anyway."

But when they came to ascend the steps leading to the "outside doors,"
they found that those doors had been closed and locked for the night.

"It's no use," Sam lamented, "and we can't bust 'em, cause I tried to,
once before. Fanny always locks 'em about five o'clock--I forgot. We
got to go up the stairway and try to sneak out through the house."

They tiptoed back, and up the inner stairs. They paused at the top,
then breathlessly stepped out into a hall which was entirely dark. Sam
touched Penrod's sleeve in warning, and bent to listen at a door.

Immediately that door opened, revealing the bright library, where sat
Penrod's mother and Sam's father.

It was Sam's mother who had opened the door.

"Come into the library, boys," she said. "Mrs. Schofield is just
telling us about it."

And as the two comrades moved dumbly into the lighted room, Penrod's
mother rose, and, taking him by the shoulder, urged him close to the
fire.

"You stand there and try to dry off a little, while I finish telling
Mr. and Mrs. Williams about you and Sam," she said. "You'd better make
Sam keep near the fire, too, Mrs. Williams, because they both got
wringing wet. Think of their running off just when most people would
have wanted to stay! Well, I'll go on with the story, then. Della told
me all about it, and what the cook next door said _she'd_ seen, how
they'd been trying to pull grass and leaves for the poor old thing all
day--and all about the apples they carried from _your_ cellar, and
getting wet and working in the rain as hard as they could--and they'd
given him a loaf of bread! Shame on you, Penrod!" She paused to laugh,
but there was a little moisture round her eyes, even before she
laughed. "And they'd fed him on potatoes and lettuce and cabbage and
turnips out of _our_ cellar! And I wish you'd see the sawdust bed they
made for him! Well, when I'd telephoned, and the Humane Society man got
there, he said it was the most touching thing he ever knew. It seems he
_knew_ this horse, and had been looking for him. He said ninety-nine
boys out of a hundred would have chased the poor old thing away, and he
was going to see to it that this case didn't go unnoticed, because the
local branch of the society gives little silver medals for special acts
like this. And the last thing he said before he led the poor old horse
away was that he was sure Penrod and Sam each would be awarded one at
the meeting of the society next Thursday night."

... On the following Saturday morning a yodel sounded from the sunny
sidewalk in front of the Schofields' house, and Penrod, issuing forth,
beheld the familiar figure of Samuel Williams in waiting.

Upon Sam's breast there glittered a round bit of silver suspended by a
white ribbon from a bar of the same metal. Upon the breast of Penrod
was a decoration precisely similar.

"'Lo, Penrod," said Sam. "What you goin' to do?"

"Nothin'."

"I got mine on," said Sam.

"I have, too," said Penrod. "I wouldn't take a hundred dollars for
mine."

Each glanced pleasantly at the other's medal. They faced each other
without shame. Neither had the slightest sense of hypocrisy either in
himself or in his comrade. On the contrary!

Penrod's eyes went from Sam's medal back to his own; thence they
wandered, with perhaps a little disappointment, to the lifeless street
and to the empty yards and spectatorless windows of the neighborhood.
Then he looked southward toward the busy heart of the town, where
multitudes were.

"Let's go down and see what time it is by the court-house clock," said
Penrod.




MARY RAYMOND SHIPMAN ANDREWS

"American, Sir!"[A]


"Dear Uncle Bill:" (And why he should have called me "Uncle Bill,"
Heaven only knows. I was not his uncle and almost never had I been
addressed as "Bill." But he chose the name, without explanation, from
the first.) "Dear Uncle Bill: Where am I going to in vacation? The
fellows ask. Their fathers come to Commencement and take them home. I'm
the only one out, because my father's dead. And I haven't anybody to
belong to. It would be great if you'd come. Yours Sincerely--John."

      [A] Copyright, 1919, by the American National Red Cross.

I threw the letter in the scrap-basket and an hour later fished it out.
I read it over. I--go to a school commencement! Not if I knew it! The
cheek of the whippersnapper! I had not even seen him; he might be any
sort of wild Indian; he might expect me to "take him home" afterwards.
Rather _not_! I should give him to understand that I would pay his
bills and--well, yes--I would send him to a proper place in vacations;
but be bothered by him personally I would not. Fishing trips to Canada
interrupted by a child! Unthinkable. I would write to that effect.

I sat down to my orderly desk and drew out paper. I began: "Dear John."
Then I stopped. An unwelcome vision arose of a small boy who was "the
only one out." "My father's dead." Thirty years rolled back, and I saw
the charming boy, a cousin, who had come to be this lad's father. I
turned my head at that thought, as long ago I had turned it every
morning when I waked to look at him, the beautiful youngster of my
adoration, sleeping across the room which we shared together. For a
dozen years we shared that room and other things--ponies, trips abroad,
many luxuries. For the father and mother who worshipped and pampered
John, and who were casually kind to me, an uninteresting orphan--these
were rich, then, and free-handed. Too free-handed, it was seen later,
for when the two were killed at one moment in an accident, only debts
were left for John. I was suddenly important, I, the gray satellite of
the rainbow prince, for I had a moderate fortune. The two of us were
just graduated from Yale; John with honors and prizes and hosts of
friends, I with some prizes and honors. Yet I had not been "tapped" for
"Bones" or "Scroll and Key"[49-1] and I was a solitary pilgrim ever,
with no intimates. We stood so together, facing out towards life.

I split my unimpressive patrimony in two and John took his part and
wandered south on a mining adventure. For that, he was always keen
about the south and his plan from seventeen on was to live in Italy.
But it was I, after all, who went to Italy year after year, while John
led Lord knows what thriftless life in Florida. From the last morning
when he had wheeled, in our old big room, and dashed across it and
thrown his arms around me in his own impulsive, irresistible way--since
that morning I had never seen him. Letters, plenty. More money was
needed always. John always thought that the world owed him a living.

Then he did the thing which was incredible and I pulled him out and
hushed up the story and repaid the money, but it made me ill, and I
suppose I was a bit savage, for he barely answered my letters after,
and shortly stopped writing altogether. John could not endure
unpleasantness. I lost sight of him till years later when he--and
I--were near forty and I had a note signed Margaret Donaldson, John's
wife. John was dead. He had been on a shooting trip and a gun had gone
off. Though it was not in words, yet through them I got a vague
suggestion of suicide. Heavy-hearted, I wondered. The life so suddenly
ended had once been dear to me.

"They did not bring John home," the note said. "He was so badly
mutilated that they buried him near where he died. I believe he would
have wanted you to know, and for that reason I am writing. I am an
entirely capable bread-winner, so that John's boy and I will have no
troubles as to money."

There was a child two years old. I liked the chill and the independence
of the proud little note.

The next chapter opened ten years later with a letter saying that
Margaret Donaldson's boy was left with her poor and elderly parents and
that they did not want him. Would I, his mother being dead, take care
of him? He was twelve, healthy and intelligent--which led directly to
the evening when I sat, very cross, at my desk and fished young John's
note out of the scrap-basket. I had got as far in answer as "Dear
John"--when these visions of the past interrupted. I am not soft-hearted.
I am crabbed and prejudiced and critical, and I dislike irregularity.
Above all I am thoroughly selfish. But the sum of that is short of
being brutal. Only sheer brutality could repel the lad's note and
request. My answer went as follows:

    "Dear John: I will come to your commencement and bring you back
    with me for a short time. I may take you on a fishing trip to
    Canada. Sincerely, Uncle Bill."

The youngster as he came into the school drawing-room was a thing to
remember. He was a tall boy, and he looked like his father. Very olive
he was--and is--and his blue eyes shone out of the dark face from under
the same thickset and long lashes. His father's charm and beauty halted
me, but I judged, before I let myself go, that he had also his mother's
stability. I have seen no reason since to doubt my judgment. I never
had so fine a fishing trip to Canada as that summer, in spite of the
fact that John broke four good rods. He has been my most successful
investment; and when the war broke out and he rushed to me clamoring to
go, I felt indeed that I was giving humanity my best and my own. Then
one day he came, in his uniform of an ambulance driver, to tell me
good-bye.

That was in 1914, and the boy, just about to enter Yale, was eighteen.
He went through bad fighting, and in March, 1917, he was given a Croix
de Guerre.[52-1] Then America came in and he transferred to his own
flag and continued ambulance work under our Red Cross. He drove one
of the twenty ambulances hurried into Italy after the Caporetto
disaster[52-2] in October, the first grip of the hand of America to
that brave hand of Italy.

I did not know for a time that my lad was in the ambulance section
rushed to Italy, but I had a particular interest from the first in this
drive for I had spent weeks, twice, up in Lombardy and Venetia.[52-3]
That was how I followed the Italian disaster--as a terrible blow to a
number of old friends. Then after the Caporetto crisis came the stand
behind the Tagliamento;[52-4] the retreat still farther and the more
hopeful stand behind the Piave.[52-5] And with that I knew that the
First Ambulance Section was racing to the Italian front and that my
boy was driving one of the cars.

And behold it was now the year 1919 and the war was over and the
cablegram from Bordeaux, which read: "Sailing 13th Santa Angela 12 day
boat New York," was a week old.

Of course I met him. I left a director's meeting and vital engagements,
with indecent firmness, to meet that ship. At crack of dawn on a raw
morning in March I arose and drove miles to a freezing pier to meet it.
And presently, as I stood muffled in a fur coat, an elderly, grizzled,
small man, grim and unexhilarating--presently the soul of this
monotonous person broke into song. For out of the early morning, out
from behind a big anchored vessel near the pier, poked the nose of a
troop ship and lumbered forward, and her decks were brown with three
thousand soldiers--Americans of our victorious army coming home from
overseas.

It was a sight which none of us will ever see again. Out in the harbor
tugs were yelping, whistles blowing; the little fleet which had gone
down the bay to meet the incoming troops was screaming itself mad in a
last chorus of joyful welcome. And the good ship _Santa Angela_,
blessed old tub, rolled nearer till the lads on her, shouting, waving,
laughing, crying lads could be seen separately, and she had rounded the
corner into the slip and was mere yards from the dock.

And then the boy came down the gangplank and I greeted him as is my
ungracious way, as if he had been off on a sailing trip. But he knew,
and he held to me, the tall fellow, with his arm around my shoulder
unashamed, and from that moment to this in the den he had hardly let me
out of his sight.

After dinner that night I settled back in deep satisfaction and lighted
a fresh cigar. And the boy, standing before the blazing logs, which
kept up a pleasant undertone to the music of his young voice, began.

"You know, Uncle Bill, we were blamed proud to be Red Cross when we
knew what was doing about Italy. It was plumb great. You know it all
of course. But I saw it. No worse fight ever--in all history. Towns
turned into a rolling river of refugees. Hungry, filthy, rain-soaked,
half-clad--old, babies, sick--a multitude pitiful beyond words--stumbling,
racing down those mountain trails, anyhow--to get anywhere--away."

He dropped into a chair and went on.

"We didn't get there for the first, but it was plenty bad enough," and
his eyes were seeing wordless sights. "The United States had declared
war on Austria December 7th, and four days later Section One was
rolling across the battlefield of Solferino.

"I was proud to be in that bunch. Talk about the flower of a country,
Uncle Bill,--we grew 'em. Six wore the Croix de Guerre--well, of course
that's often just luck." He reddened as he remembered who was one of
that six. "All of them had gone through battles a-plenty. Whole
shooting-match keen for service--no slackers and no greenhorns in that
crowd.

"We started on the twelve hundred mile trip to Milan from Paris
November 18th, and at Ventimiglia, just over the border, Italy welcomed
us. Lord, Uncle Bill," the boy laughed out, and rubbed his eyes where
tears stood. "They wouldn't look at our passports--no, sir! They opened
the gate to Italy and we rolled in like visiting princes. They showered
presents on us, those poor villagers--food, flowers--all they had.
Often didn't keep any for themselves.

"We got there December 8th. Tuned up the cars and were off again in
two or three days, to the job. They gave us a great send-off. Real
party. Two parties. First a sort of reception in a big gray courtyard
of an old palace, all dolled up with American and Italian flags. Big
bugs and speeches--and they presented us to Italy. A bugle blew and
a hundred of us in khaki--we'd been reinforced--stood at salute and
an Italian general swept into the gates with his train of plumed
Bersagliari[55-1]--sent to take us over. Then we twenty drove our
busses out with our own flags flying and pulled up again for Party
Number Two in front of the Cathedral. Finally the Mayor bid us his
prettiest good-bye, and off we drove again through the cheering crowds
and the waving flags--this time out of the city gate--to the Piave
front."

The boy rose from his chair, put on a fresh log, then turned and stood
facing me, towering over me in his young magnificence.

It flashed to me that I'd never seen him look so like his father, yet
so different. All John Donaldson's physical beauty, all his charm were
repeated in his son, but underlaid with a manliness, a force which poor
John never had.

"We were pitched into the offensive in the hottest of it," spoke the
boy. "It was thick. We were hampered by lack of workers. We wanted
Americans. Morgan had a thought.

"'Italy's full of Americans,' he suggested. 'Living here. Over military
age, but fit for a lot of our use. I miss my guess if bunches of 'em
wouldn't jump at a chance to get busy under their own flag.'

"We sent out a call and they came. Down from hill-towns, out of cities,
from villages we'd never heard of--it was amazing how they came. We
didn't dream there was such a number. Every one middle-aged, American
all, and gentlemen all. One morning, after brisk work the night before,
I'd just turned out and was standing by my bus--I slept on a stretcher
inside--I saw a big, athletic, grizzled chap, maybe fifty-five or over,
shabby as to clothes, yet with an air like a duke, sauntering up. How
he got in there I never thought to ask. He held out his hand as if we
were old friends. 'Good morning,' he said. 'I hope I didn't wake you
up. How do you like Italy?' There was something attractive about him,
something suggestive of a gracious host whose flower garden was
Italy--which he trusted was to my taste. I told him I worshipped Italy.

"Just then a shell--they were coming over off and on--struck two
hundred yards down the road and we both turned to look. In thirty
seconds, maybe, another--and another--placed middling close, half a
minute apart maybe, till eight had plowed along that bit. When they
stopped, he looked at me. 'That's the first time I ever saw shells
light nearby,' he spoke. 'Eight, I made it. But two were duds, weren't
they?'

"It didn't seem to occur to him that they might have hit him. About
then he saw me wondering, I suppose, what a civilian was doing making
conversation inside the lines before breakfast, and he explained.

"'You need men for the Red Cross, I believe,' he explained. 'I came to
offer my services.' He spoke English perfectly, yet with a foreign
twist, and he was so very dark that I wondered about his nationality.

"'Are you Italian?' I asked, and at that he started and straightened
his big shabby shoulders as if I'd hit him, and flushed through his
brown skin.

"'American, sir,' he said proudly.

"And, Uncle Bill, something in the way he said it almost brought tears
to my eyes. It was as if his right to being American was the last and
most precious thing he owned, and as if I'd tried to take it from him.

"So I threw back 'That's great,' as heartily as I knew how, and shook
hands with him over it.

"There was something about him which I couldn't place. He looked--natural.
Especially his eyes.

"Well, I said we'd be delighted to use him, and told him where to
report and then, though it wasn't my business, I asked his name. And
what do you think he told me?"

I shook my head.

"He gave his name as John Donaldson," stated the boy.

"What!" I asked bewildered. "This man in Italy was called----"

"By my name," the boy said slowly. "John Donaldson."

I reasoned a bit. "John Donaldson" is a name not impossible to be
duplicated. "It was devilish odd," I said, "to run into your own handle
like that, wasn't it?"

The boy went on. "At that second Ted Frith ran along shouting, '7:30.
Better hurry. Coffee's waiting.' So I threw the strange man a good-bye
and bolted.

"That day we were going some. They were heaving eggs from the other
side of the Piave and we were bringing back wounded to the dressing
stations as fast as we could make it over that wrecked land; going back
faster for more. When I stopped for chow at midday, I found Ted Frith
near me, eating also.

"'Remember the old boy you were talking to this morning?' asked Ted
between two mouthfuls of dum-dums--that's beans, Uncle Bill. I 'lowed I
remembered the old boy; in fact he'd stuck in my mind all day.

"'Well,' Ted went on, 'he's a ring-tailed snorter. He's got an American
uniform, tin derby and all, and he's up in the front trenches in the
cold and mud with his chocolates and stuff, talking the lingo to the
wops and putting heart into them something surprising. They're cheering
up wherever he goes. Good work.'

"That afternoon I ran into the man under hot fire hurrying down the
communication trench for more stuff. He looked as pleased as a boy with
a new pony. 'Hello,' I yelled across the noise. 'How do you like our
Italy? They tell me you're helping a lot.'

"He stopped and stared with those queerly homelike, big eyes. 'Do
they?' he smiled. 'It's the best time I've had for years, sir.'

"'Needn't _sir_ me,' I explained. 'I'm not an officer.'

"'Ah, but you are--my superior officer,' he argued in a courteous,
lovely way. 'I'm a recruit--raw recruit. Certainly I must say _sir_, to
you.'

"'Duck there,' I shouted. 'You're on a rise--you'll be hit.'

"He glanced around. 'If you knew what a treat I'd consider it to be
done for wearing this.' He looked down and slapped his big knee in its
khaki. 'But if I'm helping, it's the game to keep whole. You see, sir,'
and he laughed out loud--'this is my good day. I'm American to-day,
sir!'

"And as I let in the clutch and turned the wheel, I sniffled. The man's
delight at being allowed to do a turn of any sort under the flag got
me.

"The hideous day wore on; one of the worst I went through. We were
rushing 'em steadily--four badly wounded in the back you know, and one
who could sit up in the front seat with the driver, every trip. About
3:30 as I was going up to the front lines, I struck Ted Firth again
coming down.

"'That you, Johnny?' he shouted as we jammed together, and then: 'Your
friend's got his,' he said. We were caught in a crowd and had to wait,
so we could talk.

"'Oh no!' I groaned. 'Gone west?'

"He shook his head. 'I think not yet. But I'm afraid he's finished. Had
to leave him. Didn't see him till I was loaded up. He's been
stretcher-bearer the last three hours.'

"'The devil he has. Why?'

"'A sudden attack--bearer was killed. He jumped in and grabbed the
stretcher. Powerful old boy. Back and forth from the hurricane to the
little dressing station, and at last he got it. Thick to-day, isn't
it?'

"'Stretcher-bearer!' I repeated. 'Nerve for a new bird.'

"'Nerve!' echoed Teddy. 'He's been eating it up. The hotter it got, the
better it suited. He's one of the heroes fast enough. If he lives, he's
due a cross for his last stunt--out under fire twice in five minutes to
bring in wounded. But he won't live. There--it's clearing. You run
along and find the old boy, Johnny.'

"I found him. He was hurt too badly to talk about. As gently as we knew
how, Joe Barron and I lifted him into the car and he recognized me.

"'Why, good evening, sir,' he greeted me, smiling at the disputed
title, charming and casual as ever. He identified me--'The boy who
adored Italy.' Then: 'Such luck!' he gasped. 'Killed--in our
uniform--serving!' And as he felt my hand on his forehead: 'For God's
sake don't be sorry, lad,' he begged. 'A great finish for me. I never
hoped for luck like this.'

"There's a small village," the boy went on--"I never knew its name;
it's back of the Piave; only a pile of broken stuff now anyhow. But the
church was standing that night, a lovely old church with a tower
pierced with windows. We stuck in a traffic jam in front of that
church. The roads were one solid column going forward into the mess.
Mile after mile of it in one stream--and every parallel road must have
been the same.

"It got dark early and the ration truck was late coming up, being
caught in the jam. It was night by the time the eats were ready and I
left my bus in front of the church I spoke of. I'd wished myself on the
officers of a battery having mess in trees back of a ruined house. When
I went back to the bus, it was clean dark. But the sky was alight with
gun flashes from everywhere, a continuous flicker like summer lightning
with glares here and there like a sudden blaze from a factory chimney.
The rumbling gun thunder was without a break, punctuated by heavier
boomings; the near guns seemed an insane 4th of July. I looked in at my
load and I saw that my namesake was worse. We were still trapped in the
jam; no chance of breaking for hours maybe. I saw then that they'd
turned the church into a dressing station. There was straw on the stone
floors and two surgeons and some orderlies. Wounded were being carried
in on stretchers. Joe Barron and I lifted out John Donaldson and took
him in and cared for him as well as possible until we could corral an
overworked doctor. I thought I'd talk to him a bit to distract him, and
he seemed glad to have me."

The lad stopped; his big fingers pulled at the collar of his uniform.

"Little by little," he went on, "John Donaldson of Italy told his
story. He held tight to my hand as he told it." The boy halted again
and bit at his lower lip with strong white teeth. "I like to remember
that," he went on slowly. "He had lived nearly twenty years in Perugia.
He had run away from America. Because--he--took money. Quite a lot of
money. He--was supposed to be dead."

I sat forward, grasping the sides of my chair, pulling the thing out of
the boy with straining gaze.

"Uncle Bill," he spoke, and his dear voice shook, "you know who it was.
I found why his eyes looked familiar. They were exactly like my own.
The man I was helping to die was my father."

I heard my throat make a queer sound, but I said no word. The voice
flowed on, difficultly, determinedly.

"It's a strange thing to remember--a weird and unearthly bit of
living--that war-ruined church, strewn with straw, the wounded wrapped
like mummies in dark blankets, their white bandages making high spots
in the wavering, irregular lights of lanterns and pocket flashes moving
about. I sat on the pavement by his side, hand in hand. A big crucifix
hung above, and the Christ seemed to be looking--at him."

The voice stopped. I heard my own as a sound from beyond me asking a
question. "How did you find out?" I asked.

"Why, you see, Uncle Bill," he answered, as if my voice had helped him
to normality a bit, "I started off by saying I'd write to anybody for
him, and wasn't there somebody at home maybe? And he smiled out of his
torture, and said 'Nobody.'

"Then I said how proud we were of such Americans as he had shown
himself and how much he'd helped. I told him what Teddy Frith said of
how he'd put heart into the men. And about the war cross. At that his
face brightened.

"'Did he really say I'd helped?' He was awfully pleased. Then he
considered a moment and spoke: 'There's one lad I'd like to have
know--if it's possible to find him--and if he ever knows anything about
me--that I died decently.'

"I threw at him--little dreaming the truth, yet eagerly--'I'll find
him. I promise it. What's his name?'

"And he smiled again, an alluring, sidewise smile he had, and said:
'Why, the same name as mine--John Donaldson. He was my baby.'

"Then for the first time the truth came in sight, and my heart stood
still. I couldn't speak. But I thought fast. I feared giving him a
shock, yet I had to know--I had to tell him. I put my free hand over
his that clung to me and I said: 'Do you know, Mr. Donaldson, it's
queer, but that's my name too. I also am John Donaldson.'

"He turned his head with a start and his eyes got wide. 'You are?' he
said, and he peered at me in the half light. 'I believe you look like
me. God!' he said. His face seemed to sharpen and he shot words at me.
'Quick!' he said. 'I mayn't have time. What was your mother's name?'

"I told him.

"He was so still for a breath that I thought I'd killed him. Then his
face lighted--quite angelically, Uncle Bill. And he whispered, two or
three words at a time--you know the words, Uncle Bill--Tennyson:

"'Sunset and evening star' he whispered:

"'Sunset and evening star,

"'And one clear call for me----'

"He patted the breast of his bloody, grimy uniform. 'Following the
flag! Me! My son to hold my hand as I go out! I hadn't dreamed of such
a passing.' Then he looked up at me, awfully interested. 'So you're my
big son,' he said. 'My baby.'

"I knew that he was remembering the little shaver he'd left twenty
years back. So I leaned over and kissed him, and he got his arm around
my neck and held me pretty tight a minute, and nobody cared. All those
dying, suffering, last-ditch men lying around, and the two worn-out
doctors hurrying among 'em--they didn't care. No more did he and I. I'd
found my father; I wasn't caring for anything else."

There was deep silence in the room again and a log of the fire crackled
and fell apart and blazed up impersonally; the pleasant sound jarred
not at all the tense, human atmosphere.

"And he----! Uncle Bill," went on the throbbing voice, "through the
devilish pain he was radiant. He was, thank God! I wanted to hold up a
doctor and get dope to quiet him--and he wouldn't.

"'It might make me unconscious,' he objected. 'Would I lose a minute of
you? Not if I know it! This is the happiest hour I've had for twenty
years.'

"He told me, a bit at a time, about things. First how he'd arranged so
that even my mother thought him dead. Then the bald facts of his
downfall. He hated to tell that.

"'Took money,' he said. 'Very unjustifiable. But I ought to have had
plenty--life's most unreasonable. Then--I couldn't face--discovery--hate,
unpleasantness.' He shuddered. 'Might have been--jailed.' It was
shaking him so I tried to stop him, but he pointed to his coat and
laughed--Uncle Bill, a pitiful laugh. It tore me. 'John Donaldson's
making a good getaway,' he labored out. 'Must tell everything. I'll
finish--clean. To--my son. Honor of--the uniform.' He was getting
exhausted. 'That's all,' he ended, 'Dishonor.'

"And I flung at him: 'No--no. It's covered over--wiped out--with
service and honor. You're dying for the flag, father--father!' I
whispered with my arms around him and crying like a child with a
feeling I'd never known before. 'Father, father!' I whispered, and he
lifted a hand and patted my head.

"'That sounds nice,' he said. Suddenly he looked amused. His nerve all
through was the bulliest thing you ever saw, Uncle Bill. Not a whimper.
'You thought I was Italian,' he brought out. 'Years ago, this morning.
But--I'm not. American, sir--I heard the call--the one clear call.
American.'

"Then he closed his eyes and his breathing was so easy that I thought
he might sleep, and live hours, maybe. I loosened his fingers and
lifted his head on my coat that I'd folded for a pillow, for I thought
I'd go outside and find Joe Barron and get him to take the bus down
when the jam held up so I could start. Before I started, I bent over
again and he opened his eyes, and I said very distinctly: 'I want you
to know that I'll be prouder all my life than words can say that I've
had you for a father,' and he brought out a long, perfectly contented
sigh, and seemed to drop off.

"I began to pick my way through the clutter of men lying, some still as
death, some writhing and gurgling horrid sounds. I had got about eight
feet when across the hideous noises broke a laugh like a pleased kid. I
whirled. He'd lifted his big shoulders up from the straw and was
laughing after me from under those thick black lashes; his eyes were
brilliant. He stretched out his arms to me.

"'American, sir,' he said in a strong voice. And fell back dead."

I heard the clock tick and tick. And tick. Minutes went by. Then the
boy got up in the throbbing silence and walked to the fire and stood,
his back to me, looking down at the embers. His voice came over his
square young shoulders, difficult but determined, as of a man who must
say a thing which has dogged him to be said.

"God arranged it, Uncle Bill. I know that well enough. God forgave him
enough to send him me and a happy day to go out on. So don't you
believe--that things are all right with him now?"

It was hard to speak, but I had to--I had a message. "John," I said,
"we two know the splendor of his going, and that other things count as
nothing beside that redemption. Do you suppose a great God is more
narrow-minded than we?"

And my boy turned, and came and sat on the broad side of the chair, and
put his arm around my shoulder and his young head against mine. His
cheek was hot and wet on my thin hair.

"American, sir," whispered my dear boy, softly.




KATHERINE MAYO

John G.


It was nine o'clock of a wild night in December. For forty-eight hours
it had been raining, raining, raining, after a heavy fall of snow.
Still the torrents descended, lashed by a screaming wind, and the song
of rushing water mingled with the cry of the gale. Each steep street of
the hill-town of Greensburg lay inches deep under a tearing flood. The
cold was as great as cold may be while rain is falling. A night to give
thanks for shelter overhead, and to hug the hearth with gratitude.

First Sergeant Price, at his desk in the Barracks office, was honorably
grinding law. Most honorably, because, when he had gone to take the
book from its shelf in the day-room, "Barrack-Room Ballads"[68-1] had
smiled down upon him with a heart-aching echo of the soft, familiar
East; so that of a sudden he had fairly smelt the sweet, strange,
heathen smell of the temples in Tien Tsin--had seen the flash of a
parrot's wing in the bolo-toothed Philippine jungle. And the sight and
the smell, on a night like this, were enough to make any man lonely.

Therefore it was with honor indeed that, instead of dreaming off into
the radiant past through the well thumbed book of magic, he was digging
between dull sheepskin covers after the key to the bar of the State, on
which his will was fixed.

Now, a man who, being a member of the Pennsylvania State Police,[69-1]
aspires to qualify for admission to the bar, has his work cut out for
him. The calls of his regular duty, endless in number and kind, leave
him no certain leisure, and few and broken are the hours that he gets
for books.

"Confound the Latin!" grumbled the Sergeant, grabbing his head in his
two hands. "Well--anyway, here's my night for it. Even the crooks will
lie snug in weather like this." And he took a fresh hold on the poser.

Suddenly "buzz" went the bell beside him. Before its voice ceased he
stood at salute in the door of the Captain's office.

"Sergeant," said Captain Adams, with a half-turn of his desk-chair,
"how soon can you take the field?"

"Five minutes, sir."

"There's trouble over in the foundry town. The local authorities have
jailed some I. W. W.[69-2] plotters. They state that a jail delivery is
threatened, that the Sheriff can't control it, and that they believe
the mob will run amuck generally and shoot up the town. Take a few men;
go over and attend to it."

"Very well, sir."

In the time that goes to saddling a horse, the detail rode into the
storm, First Sergeant Price on John G., leading.

John G. had belonged to the Force exactly as long as had the First
Sergeant himself, which was from the dawn of the Force's existence.
And John G. is a gentleman and a soldier, every inch of him. Horse-show
judges have affixed their seal to the self-evident fact by the sign of
the blue ribbon,[70-1] but the best proof lies in the personal
knowledge of "A" Troop, soundly built on twelve years' brotherhood.
John G., on that diluvian night, was twenty-two years old, and still
every whit as clean-limbed, alert, and plucky as his salad days had
seen him.

Men and horses dived into the gale as swimmers dive into a breaker. It
beat their eyes shut with wind and driven water, and, as they slid down
the harp-pitched city streets, the flood banked up against each planted
hoof till it split in folds above the fetlock.

Down in the country beyond, mud, slush, and water clogged with chunks
of frost-stricken clay made worse and still worse going. And so they
pushed on through blackest turmoil toward the river road that should be
their highway to Logan's Ferry.

They reached that road at last, only to find it as lost as
Atlantis,[70-2] under twenty feet of water! The Allegheny had
overflowed her banks, and now there remained no way across, short of
following the stream up to Pittsburgh and so around, a detour of many
miles, long and evil.

"And that," said First Sergeant Price, "means getting to the party
about four hours late. Baby-talk and nonsense! By that time they might
have burned the place and killed all the people in it. Let's see, now:
there's a railroad bridge close along here, somewhere."

They scouted till they found the bridge. But behold, its floor was of
cross-ties only--of sleepers to carry the rails, laid with wide breaks
between, gaping down into deep, dark space whose bed was the roaring
river.

"Nevertheless," said First Sergeant Price, whose spirits ever soar at
the foolish onslaughts of trouble--"nevertheless, we're _not_ going to
ride twenty miles farther for nothing. There's a railroad yard on the
other side. This bridge, here, runs straight into it. You two men go
over, get a couple of good planks, and find out when the next train is
due."

The two Troopers whom the Sergeant indicated gave their horses to a
comrade and started away across the trestle.

For a moment those who stayed behind could distinguish the rays of
their pocket flash-lights as they picked out their slimy foothold. Then
the whirling night engulfed them, lights and all.

The Sergeant led the remainder of the detail down into the lee of an
abutment, to avoid the full drive of the storm. Awhile they stood
waiting, huddled together. But the wait was not for long. Presently,
like a code signal spelled out on the black overhead, came a series of
steadily lengthening flashes--the pocket-light glancing between the
sleepers, as the returning messengers drew near.

Scrambling up to rail level, the Sergeant saw with content that his
emissaries bore on their shoulders between them two new pine
"two-by-twelves."[72-1]

"No train's due till five o'clock in the morning," reported the first
across.

"Good! Now lay the planks. In the middle of the track. End to end. So."

The Sergeant, dismounting, stood at John G.'s wise old head, stroking
his muzzle, whispering into his ear.

"Come along, John, it's all right, old man!" he finished with a final
caress.

Then he led John G. to the first plank.

"One of you men walk on each side of him. Now, John!"

Delicately, nervously, John G. set his feet, step by step, till he had
reached the centre of the second plank.

Then the Sergeant talked to him quietly again, while two Troopers
picked up the board just quitted to lay it in advance.

And so, length by length, they made the passage, the horse moving with
extremest caution, shivering with full appreciation of the unaccustomed
danger, yet steadied by his master's presence and by the friend on
either hand. As they moved, the gale wreaked all its fury on them. It
was growing colder now, and the rain, changed to sleet, stung their
skins with its tiny, sharp-driven blades. The skeleton bridge held them
high suspended in the very heart of the storm. Once and again a sudden
more violent gust bid fair to sweep them off their feet. Yet, slowly
progressing, they made their port unharmed.

Then came the next horse's turn. More than a single mount they dared
not lead over at once, lest the contagious fears of one, reacting on
another, produce panic. The horse that should rear or shy, on that
wide-meshed footing, would be fairly sure to break a leg, at best. So,
one by one, they followed over, each reaching the farther side before
his successor began the transit.

And so, at last, all stood on the opposite bank, ready to follow John
G. once more, as he led the way to duty.

"Come along, John, old man. You know how you'd hate to find a lot of
dead women and babies because we got there too late to save them! Make
a pace, Johnny boy!"

The First Sergeant was talking gently, leaning over his pommel. But
John G. was listening more from politeness than because he needed a
lift. His stride was as steady as a clock.

It was three hours after midnight on that bitter black morning as they
entered the streets of the town. And the streets were as quiet, as
peaceful, as empty of men, as the heart of the high woods.

"Where's their mob?" growled the Sergeant.

"Guess its mother's put it to sleep," a cold, wet Trooper growled back.

"Well, we _thought_ there was going to be trouble," protested the local
power, roused from his feather bed. "It really did look like serious
trouble, I assure you. And we could not have handled serious trouble
with the means at our command. Moreover, there may easily be something
yet. So, gentlemen, I am greatly relieved you have come. I can sleep in
peace now that you are here. Good-night! _Good_-night!"

All through the remaining hours of darkness the detail patrolled the
town. All through the lean, pale hours of dawn it carefully watched its
wakening, guarded each danger-point. But never a sign of disturbance
did the passing time bring forth.

At last, with the coming of the business day, the Sergeant sought out
the principal men of the place, and from them ascertained the truth.

Threats of a jail delivery there had been, and a noisy parade as well,
but nothing had occurred or promised beyond the power of an active
local officer to handle. Such was the statement of one and all.

"I'll just make sure," said the Sergeant to himself.

Till two o'clock in the afternoon the detail continued its patrols. The
town and its outskirts remained of an exemplary peace. At two o'clock
the Sergeant reported by telephone to his Captain:--

"Place perfectly quiet, sir. Nothing seems to have happened beyond the
usual demonstration of a sympathizing crowd over an arrest. Unless
something more breaks, the Sheriff should be entirely capable of
handling the situation."

"Then report back to Barracks at once," said the voice of the Captain
of "A" Troop. "There's _real_ work waiting here."

The First Sergeant, hanging up the receiver, went out and gathered his
men.

Still the storm was raging. Icy snow, blinding sheets of sharp-fanged
smother, rode on the racing wind. Worse overhead, worse underfoot,
would be hard to meet in years of winters.

But once again men and horses, without an interval of rest, struck into
the open country. Once again on the skeleton bridge they made the
precarious crossing. And so, at a quarter to nine o'clock at night, the
detail topped Greensburg's last ice-coated hill and entered the yard of
its high-perched Barracks.

As the First Sergeant slung the saddle off John G.'s smoking back,
Corporal Richardson, farrier of the Troop, appeared before him wearing
a mien of solemn and grieved displeasure.

"It's all very well," said he,--"all very well, no doubt. But
eighty-six miles in twenty-four hours, in weather like this, is a good
deal for any horse. And John G. is twenty-two years old, as perhaps you
may remember. _I've brought the medicine._"

Three solid hours from that very moment the two men worked over John
G., and when, at twelve o'clock, they put him up for the night, not a
wet hair was left on him. As they washed and rubbed and bandaged, they
talked together, mingling the Sergeant's trenchantly humorous common
sense with the Corporal's mellow philosophy. But mostly it was the
Corporal that spoke, for twenty-four hours is a fair working day for a
Sergeant as well as a Troop horse.

"I believe in my soul," said the Sergeant, "that if a man rode into
this stable with his two arms shot off at the shoulder, you'd make him
groom his horse with his teeth and his toes for a couple of hours
before you'd let him hunt a doctor."

"Well," rejoined Corporal Richardson, in his soft Southern tongue, "and
what if I did? Even if that man died of it, he'd thank me heartily
afterward. You know, when you and I and the rest of the world, each in
our turn, come to Heaven's gate, there'll be St. Peter before it, with
the keys safe in his pocket. And over the shining wall behind--_from
the inside_, mind you--will be poking a great lot of heads--innocent
heads with innocent eyes--heads of horses and of all the other animals
that on this earth are the friends of man, put at his mercy and
helpless.

"And it's clear to me--over, John! so, boy!--that before St. Peter
unlocks the gate for a single one of us, he'll turn around to that long
row of heads, and he'll say:--

"'Blessed animals in the fields of Paradise, is this a man that should
enter in?'

"And if the animals--they that were placed in his hands on earth to
prove the heart that was in him--if the immortal animals have aught to
say against that man--never will the good Saint let him in, with his
dirty, mean stain upon him. Never. _You'll_ see, Sergeant, when your
time comes. _Will you give those tendons another ten minutes?_"

Next morning John G. walked out of his stall as fresh and as fit as if
he had come from pasture. And to this very day, in the stable of "A"
Troop, John G., handsome, happy, and able, does his friends honor.




MYRA KELLY

Friends[B] [77-1]


"My mamma," reported Morris Mowgelewsky, choosing a quiet moment during
a writing period to engage his teacher's attention, "my mamma likes you
shall come on mine house for see her."

      [B] From _Little Aliens_, copyright, 1910, by Charles Scribner's
      Sons. By permission of the publishers.

"Very well, dear," answered Miss Bailey with a patience born of many
such messages from the parents of her small charges. "I think I shall
have time to go this afternoon."

"My mamma," Morris began again, "she says I shall tell you 'scuse how
she don't send you no letter. She couldn't to send no letter the while
her eyes ain't healthy."

"I am sorry to hear that," said Teacher, with a little stab of regret
for her prompt acceptance of Mrs. Mowgelewsky's invitation; for of all
the ailments which the children shared so generously with their
teacher, Miss Bailey had learned to dread most the many and painful
disorders of the eye. She knew, however, that Mrs. Mowgelewsky was not
one of those who utter unnecessary cries for help, being in this
regard, as in many others, a striking contrast to the majority of
parents with whom Miss Bailey came in contact.

To begin with, Mrs. Mowgelewsky had but one child--her precious, only
Morris. In addition to this singularity she was thrifty and neat,
intensely self-respecting and independent of spirit, and astonishingly
outspoken of mind. She neither shared nor understood the gregarious
spirit which bound her neighbors together and is the lubricant which
makes East Side crowding possible without bloodshed. No groups of
chattering, gesticulating matrons ever congregated in her Monroe Street
apartment. No love of gossip ever held her on street corners or on
steps. She nourished few friendships and fewer acquaintanceships, and
she welcomed no haphazard visitor. Her hospitalities were as serious as
her manner; her invitations as deliberate as her slow English speech.

And Miss Bailey, as she and the First Readers followed the order of
studies laid down for them, found herself again and again, trying to
imagine what the days would be to Mrs. Mowgelewsky if her keen, shrewd
eyes were to be darkened and useless.

At three o'clock she set out with Morris, leaving the Board of
Monitors[78-1] to set Room 18 to rights with no more direct supervision
than an occasional look and word from the stout Miss Blake, whose
kingdom lay just across the hall. And as she hurried through the early
cold of a November afternoon, her forebodings grew so lugubrious that
she was almost relieved at last to learn that Mrs. Mowgelewsky's
complaint was a slow-forming cataract, and her supplication, that Miss
Bailey would keep a watchful eye upon Morris while his mother was at
the hospital undergoing treatment and operation.

"But of course," Miss Bailey agreed, "I shall be delighted to do what I
can, Mrs. Mowgelewsky, though it seems to me that one of the
neighbors----"

"Neighbors!" snorted the matron; "What you think the neighbors make mit
mine little boy? They got four, five dozens childrens theirselves. They
ain't got no time for look on Morris. They come maybe in mine house und
break mine dishes, und rubber on what is here, und set by mine
furniture und talks. What do they know over takin' care on mine house?
They ain't ladies. They is educated only on the front. Me, I was raised
private und expensive in Russia; I was ladies. Und you ist ladies. You
ist Krisht[79-1]--that is too bad--but that makes me nothings. I wants
_you_ shall look on Morris."

"But I can't come here and take care of him," Miss Bailey pointed out.
"You see that for yourself, don't you, Mrs. Mowgelewsky? I am sorry as
I can be about your eyes, and I hope with all my heart that the
operation will be successful. But I shouldn't have time to come here
and take care of things."

"That ain't how mine mamma means," Morris explained. He was leaning
against Teacher and stroking her muff as he spoke. "Mine mamma means
the money."

"That ist what I means," said Mrs. Mowgelewsky, nodding her ponderous
head until her quite incredible wig slipped back and forth upon it.
"Morris needs he shall have money. He could to fix the house so good
like I can. He don't needs no neighbors rubberin'. He could to buy what
he needs on the store. But ten cents a day he needs. His papa works by
Harlem. He is got fine jobs, und he gets fine moneys, but he couldn't
to come down here for take care of Morris. Und the doctor he says I
shall go _now_ on the hospital. Und any way," she added sadly, "I ain't
no good; I couldn't to see things. He says I shall lay in the hospital
three weeks, may be--that is twenty-one days--und for Morris it is two
dollars und ten cents. I got the money." And she fumbled for her purse
in various hiding-places about her ample person.

"And you want me to be banker," cried Miss Bailey; "to keep the money
and give Morris ten cents a day--is that it?"

"Sure," answered Mrs. Mowgelewsky.

"It's a awful lot of money," grieved Morris. "Ten cents a day is a
awful lot of money for one boy."

"No, no, my golden one," cried his mother. "It is but right that thou
shouldst have plenty of money, und thy teacher, a Christian lady,
though honest--und what neighbor is honest?--will give thee ten cents
every morning. Behold, I pay the rent before I go, und with the rent
paid und with ten cents a day thou wilt live like a landlord."

"Yes, yes," Morris broke in, evidently repeating some familiar warning,
"und every day I will say mine prayers und wash me the face, und keep
the neighbors out, und on Thursdays und on Sundays I shall go on the
hospital for see you."

"And on Saturdays," broke in Miss Bailey, "you will come to my house
and spend the day with me. He's too little, Mrs. Mowgelewsky, to go to
the synagogue alone."

"That could be awful nice," breathed Morris. "I likes I shall go on
your house. I am lovin' much mit your dog."

"How?" snorted his mother. "Dogs! Dogs ain't nothing but foolishness.
They eats something fierce, und they don't works."

"That iss how mine mamma thinks," Morris hastened to explain, lest the
sensitive feelings of his Lady Paramount should suffer. "But mine mamma
she never seen _your_ dog. He iss a awful nice dog; I am lovin' much
mit him."

"I don't needs I shall see him," said Mrs. Mowgelewsky, somewhat
tartly. "I seen, already, lots from dogs. Don't you go make no
foolishness mit him. Don't you go und get chawed off of him."

"Of course, of course not," Miss Bailey hastened to assure her; "he
will only play with Rover if I should be busy or unable to take him out
with me. He'll be safer at my house than he would be on the streets,
and you wouldn't expect him to stay in the house all day."

After more parley and many warnings the arrangement was completed. Miss
Bailey was intrusted with two dollars and ten cents, and the censorship
of Morris. A day or so later Mrs. Mowgelewsky retired, indomitable, to
her darkened room in the hospital, and the neighbors were inexorably
shut out of her apartment. All their offers of help, all their proffers
of advice were politely refused by Morris, all their questions and
visits politely dodged. And every morning Miss Bailey handed her
Monitor of the Goldfish Bowl his princely stipend, adding to it from
time to time some fruit or other uncontaminated food, for Morris was
religiously the strictest of the strict, and could have given cards and
spades to many a minor rabbi[82-1] on the intricacies of Kosher law.

The Saturday after his mother's departure Morris spent in the
enlivening companionship of the antiquated Rover, a collie who no
longer roved farther than his own back yard, and who accepted Morris's
frank admiration with a noble condescension and a few rheumatic
gambols. Miss Bailey's mother was also hospitable, and her sister did
what she could to amuse the quaint little child with the big eyes, the
soft voice, and the pretty foreign manners. But Morris preferred Rover
to any of them, except perhaps the cook, who allowed him to prepare a
luncheon for himself after his own little rites.

Everything had seemed so pleasant and so successful that Miss Bailey
looked upon a repetition of this visit as a matter of course, and was
greatly surprised on the succeeding Friday afternoon when the Monitor
of the Goldfish Bowl said that he intended to spend the next day at
home.

"Oh, no!" she remonstrated, "you mustn't stay at home. I'm going to
take you out to the Park and we are going to have all kinds of fun.
Wouldn't you rather go and see the lions and the elephants with me than
stay at home all by yourself?"

For some space Morris was a prey to silence, then he managed by a
consuming effort:

"I ain't by mineself."

"Has your father come home?" said Teacher.

"No, ma'am."

"And surely it's not a neighbor. You remember what your mother said
about the neighbors, how you were not to let them in."

"It ain't neighbors," said Morris.

"Then who----?" began Miss Bailey.

Morris raised his eyes to hers, his beautiful, black, pleading eyes,
praying for the understanding and the sympathy which had never failed
him yet. "It's a friend," he answered.

"Nathan Spiderwitz?" she asked.

Morris shook his head, and gave Teacher to understand that the Monitor
of the Window Boxes came under the ban of neighbor.

"Well, who is it, dearest?" she asked again. "Is it any one that I
know?"

"No, ma'am."

"None of the boys in the school?"

"No, ma'am."

"Have you known him long?"

"No, ma'am."

"Does your mother know him?"

"Oh, Teacher, _no_, ma'am! Mine mamma don't know him."

"Well, where did you meet him?"

"Teacher, on the curb. Over yesterday on the night," Morris began,
seeing that explanation was inevitable, "I lays on mine bed, und I
thinks how mine mamma has got a sickness, und how mine papa is by
Harlem, und how I ain't got nobody beside of me. Und, Teacher, it makes
me cold in mine heart. So I couldn't to lay no more, so I puts me on
mit mine clothes some more, und I goes by the street, the while peoples
is there, und I needs I shall see peoples. So I sets by the curb, und
mine heart it go und it go so I couldn't to feel how it go in mine
inside. Und I thinks on my mamma, how I seen her mit bandages on the
face, und mine heart it goes some more. Und, Teacher, Missis Bailey, I
cries over it."

"Of course you did, honey," said Teacher, putting her arm about him.
"Poor, little, lonely chap! Of course you cried."

"Teacher, yiss, ma'am; it ain't fer boys they shall cry, but I cries
over it. Und soon something touches me by mine side, und I turns und
mine friend he was sittin' by side of me. Und he don't say nothings,
Teacher; no, ma'am; he don't say _nothings_, only he looks on me,
und in his eyes stands tears. So that makes me better in mine heart,
und I don't cries no more. I sets und looks on mine friend, und mine
friend he sets und looks on me mit smilin' looks. So I goes by mine
house, und mine friend he comes by mine house, too, und I lays by mine
bed, und mine friend he lays by mine side. Und all times in that night
sooner I open mine eyes und thinks on how mine mamma is got a sickness,
und mine papa is by Harlem, mine friend he is by mine side, und I don't
cries. I don't cries never no more the whiles mine friend is by me. Und
I couldn't to go on your house to-morrow the whiles I don't know if
mine friend likes Rover."

"Of course he'd like him," cried Miss Bailey. "Rover would play with
him just as he plays with you."

"No, ma'am," Morris maintained; "mine friend is too little for play mit
Rover."

"Is he such a little fellow?"

"Yiss, ma'am; awful little."

"And has he been with you ever since the day before yesterday?"

"Teacher, yiss, ma'am."

"Does he seem to be happy and all right?"

"Teacher, yiss, ma'am."

"But," asked Miss Bailey, suddenly practical, "what does the poor
little fellow eat? Of course ten cents would buy a _lot_ of food
for one boy, but not so very much for two."

"Teacher, no, ma'am," says Morris; "it ain't so very much."

"Well, then," said Miss Bailey, "suppose I give you twenty cents a day
as long as a little strange friend is with you."

"That could to be awful nice," Morris agreed; "und, Missis Bailey," he
went on, "sooner you don't needs all yours lunch mine friend could eat
it, maybe."

"Oh, I'm so sorry," she cried; "It's ham to-day."

"That don't make nothins mit mine friend," said Morris, "he likes ham."

"Now, Morris," said Miss Bailey very gravely, as all the meanings of
this announcement spread themselves before her, "this is a very serious
thing. You know how your mother feels about strangers, and you know how
she feels about Christians, and what will she say to you--and what will
she say to me--when she hears that a strange little Christian is living
with you? Of course, dearie, I know it's nice for you to have company,
and I know that you must be dreadfully lonely in the long evenings, but
I'm afraid your mother will not be pleased to think of your having
somebody to stay with you. Wouldn't you rather come to my house and
live there all the time until your mother is better. You know," she
added as a crowning inducement, "Rover is there."

But Morris betrayed no enthusiasm. "I guess," said he, "I ain't lovin'
so awful much mit Rover. He iss too big. I am likin' little dogs mit
brown eyes, what walks by their legs und carries things by their
mouths. Did you ever see dogs like that?"

"In the circus," answered Teacher. "Where did you see them?"

"A boy by our block," answered Morris, "is got one. He is lovin' much
mit that dog und that dog is lovin' much mit him."

"Well, now, perhaps you could teach Rover to walk on his hind legs, and
carry things in his mouth," suggested Teacher; "and as for this new
little Christian friend of yours----"

"I don't know _be_ he a Krisht," Morris admitted with reluctant candor;
"he ain't said nothin' over it to me. On'y a Irisher lady what lives by
our house, she says mine friend is a Irisher."

"Very well, dear; then of course he's a Christian," Miss Bailey assured
him, "and I shan't interfere with you to-morrow--you may stay at home
and play with him. But we can't let it go on, you know. This kind of
thing never would do when your mother comes back from the hospital. She
might not want your friend in the house. Have you thought of that at
all, Morris? You must make your friend understand it."

"I tells him," Morris promised; "I don't know can he understand. He's
pretty little, only that's how I tells him all times."

"Then tell him once again, honey," Miss Bailey advised, "and make him
understand that he must go back to his own people as soon as your
mother is well. Where are his own people? I can't understand how any
one so little could be wandering about with no one to take care of
him."

"Teacher, I'm takin' care of him," Morris pointed out.

All that night and all the succeeding day Miss Bailey's imagination
reverted again and again to the two little ones keeping house in Mrs.
Mowgelewsky's immaculate apartment. Even increasing blindness had not
been allowed to interfere with sweeping and scrubbing and dusting, and
when Teacher thought of that patient matron, as she lay in her hospital
cot trusting so securely to her Christian friend's guardianship of her
son and home, she fretted herself into feeling that it was her duty to
go down to Monroe Street and investigate.

There was at first no sound when, after climbing endless stairs, she
came to Mrs. Mowgelewsky's door. But as the thumping of the heart and
the singing in her ears abated somewhat, she detected Morris's familiar
treble.

"Bread," it said, "iss awful healthy for you, only you dasn't eat it
'out chewin'. I never in my world seen how you eats."

Although the words were admonitory, they lost all didactic effect by
the wealth of love and tenderness which sang in the voice. There was a
note of happiness in it, too, a throb of pure enjoyment quite foreign
to Teacher's knowledge of this sad-eyed little charge of hers. She
rested against the door frame, and Morris went on:

"I guess you don't know what iss polite. You shall better come on the
school, und Miss Bailey could to learn you what iss polite and healthy
fer you. No, you couldn't to have no meat. No, _sir_! No, _ma'am_! You
couldn't to have no meat 'till I cuts it fer you. You could to, maybe,
make yourself a sickness und a bashfulness."

Miss Bailey put her hand on the door and it yielded noiselessly to her
touch, and revealed to her guardian eyes her ward and his little
friend. They were seated _vis-a-vis_[89-1] at the table; everything was
very neat and clean and most properly set out. A little lamp was
burning clearly. Morris's hair was parted for about an inch back from
his forehead and sleeked wetly down upon his brow. The guest had
evidently undergone similar preparation for the meal. Each had a napkin
tied around his neck, and as Teacher watched them, Morris carefully
prepared his guest's dinner, while the guest, an Irish terrier, with
quick eyes and one down-flopped ear, accepted his admonishings with a
good-natured grace, and watched him with an adoring and confiding eye.

The guest was first to detect the stranger's presence. He seized a
piece of bread in his teeth, jumped to the ground, and walking up to
Teacher on his hind legs, hospitably dropped the refreshment at her
feet.

"Oh! Teacher! Teacher!" cried Morris, half in dismay at discovery, and
half in joy that this so sure confidant should share his secret and
appreciate his friend. "Oh! Teacher! Missis Bailey! this is the friend
what I was telling you over. See how he walks on his feet! See how he
has got smilin' looks! See how he carries somethings by his teeth! All
times he makes like that. Rover, he don't carries nothin's, und gold
fishes, they ain't got no feet even. On'y Izzie could to make them
things."

"Oh, is his name Izzie?" asked Miss Bailey, grasping at this
conversational straw and shaking the paw which the stranger was
presenting to her. "And this is the friend you told me about? You let
me think," she chided, with as much severity as Morris had shown to his
Izzie, "that he was a boy."

"I had a 'fraid," said the Monitor of the Gold Fish Bowl frankly.

So had Teacher as she reviewed the situation from Mrs. Mowgelewsky's
chair of state, and watched the friends at supper. It was a revelation
of solicitude on one side, and patient gratitude on the other. Morris
ate hardly anything, and was soon at Teacher's knee--Izzie was in her
lap--discussing ways and means.

He refused to entertain any plan which would separate him immediately
from Izzie, but he was at last brought to see the sweet reasonableness
of preparing his mother's mind by degrees to accept another member to
the family.

"Und he eats," his protector was forced to admit--"he eats somethin'
fierce, Missis Bailey; as much like a man he eats. Und my mamma, I
don't know what she will say. She won't leave me I shall keep him; from
long I had a little bit of a dog, und she wouldn't to leave me I should
keep _him_, und he didn't eat so much like Izzie eats, neither."

"And _I_ can't very well keep him," said Miss Bailey sadly, "because,
you see, there is Rover. Rover mightn't like it. But there is one thing
I can do: I'll keep him for a few days when your mother comes back, and
then we'll see, you and I, if we can persuade her to let you have him
always."

"She wouldn't never to do it," said Morris sadly. "That other dog,
didn't I told you how he didn't eat so much like Izzie, and she
wouldn't to let me have him? That's a cinch."

"Oh! don't say that word, dear," cried Teacher. "And we can only try.
We'll do our very, very best."

This guilty secret had a very dampening effect upon the joy with which
Morris watched for his mother's recovery. Upon the day set for her
return, he was a miserable battle-field of love and duty. Early in the
morning Izzie had been transferred to Miss Bailey's yard. Rover was
chained to his house, Izzie was tied to the wall at a safe distance
from him, and they proceeded to make the day hideous for the whole
neighborhood.

Morris remained at home to greet his mother, received her encomiums,
cooked the dinner, and set out for afternoon school with a heavy heart
and a heavier conscience. Nothing had occurred in those first hours to
show any change in Mrs. Mowgelewsky's opinion of home pets; rather she
seemed, in contrast to the mild and sympathetic Miss Bailey, more than
ever dictatorial and dogmatic.

At a quarter after three, the gold fish having received perfunctory
attention, and the Board of Monitors being left again to do their
worst, unguarded, Morris and Teacher set out to prepare Mrs.
Mowgelewsky's mind for the adoption of Izzie. They found it very
difficult. Mrs. Mowgelewsky, restored of vision, was so hospitable, so
festive in her elephantine manner, so loquacious and so
self-congratulatory, that it was difficult to insert even the tiniest
conversational wedge into the structure of her monologue.

Finally Miss Bailey managed to catch her attention upon financial
matters. "You gave me," she said, "two dollars and ten cents, and
Morris has managed so beautifully that he has not used it all, and has
five cents to return to you. He's a very wonderful little boy, Mrs.
Mowgelewsky," she added, smiling at her favorite to give him courage.

"He iss a good boy," Mrs. Mowgelewsky admitted. "Don't you get lonesome
sometimes by yourself here, huh?"

"Well," said Miss Bailey, "he wasn't always alone."

"No?" queried the matron with a divided attention. She was looking for
her purse, in which she wished to stow Morris's surplus.

"No," said Teacher; "I was here once or twice. And then a little friend
of his----"

"Friend," the mother repeated with a glare; "was friends here in mine
house?"

Miss Bailey began a purposely vague reply, but Mrs. Mowgelewsky was not
listening to her. She had searched the pockets of the gown she wore,
then various other hiding-places in the region of its waist line, then
a large bag of mattress covering which she wore under her skirt. Ever
hurriedly and more hurriedly she repeated this performance two or three
times, and then proceeded to shake and wring the out-door clothing
which she had worn that morning.

"Gott!" she broke out at last, "mine Gott! mine Gott! it don't stands."
And she began to peer about the floor with eyes not yet quite adjusted.
Morris easily recognized the symptoms.

"She's lost her pocket-book," he told Miss Bailey.

"Yes, I lost it," wailed Mrs. Mowgelewsky, and then the whole party
participated in the search. Over and under the furniture, the carpets,
the bed, the stove, over and under everything in the apartment went
Mrs. Mowgelewsky and Morris. All the joy of home-coming and of
well-being was darkened and blotted out by this new calamity. And Mrs.
Mowgelewsky beat her breast and tore her hair, and Constance Bailey
almost wept in sympathy. But the pocket-book was gone, absolutely gone,
though Mrs. Mowgelewsky called Heaven and earth to witness that she had
had it in her hand when she came in.

Another month's rent was due; the money to pay it was in the
pocket-book. Mr. Mowgelewsky had visited his wife on Sunday, and had
given her all his earnings as some salve to the pain of her eyes.
Eviction, starvation, every kind of terror and disaster were thrown
into Mrs. Mowgelewsky's wailing, and Morris proved an able second to
his mother.

Miss Bailey was doing frantic bookkeeping in her charitable mind, and
was wondering how much of the loss she might replace. She was about to
suggest as a last resort that a search should be made of the dark and
crannied stairs, where a purse, if the Fates were very, very kind,
might lie undiscovered for hours, when a dull scratching made itself
heard through the general lamentation. It came from a point far down on
the panel of the door, and the same horrible conviction seized upon
Morris and upon Miss Bailey at the same moment.

Mrs. Mowgelewsky in her frantic round had approached the door for the
one-hundredth time, and with eyes and mind far removed from what she
was doing, she turned the handle. And entered Izzie, beautifully erect
upon his hind legs, with a yard or two of rope trailing behind him, and
a pocket-book fast in his teeth.

Blank, pure surprise took Mrs. Mowgelewsky for its own. She staggered
back into a chair, fortunately of heavy architecture, and stared at the
apparition before her. Izzie came daintily in, sniffed at Morris,
sniffed at Miss Bailey, sniffed at Mrs. Mowgelewsky's ample skirts,
identified her as the owner of the pocket-book, laid it at her feet,
and extended a paw to be shaken.

"Mine Gott!" said Mrs. Mowgelewsky, "what for a dog iss that?" She
counted her wealth, shook Izzie's paw, and then stooped forward,
gathered him into her large embrace, and cried like a baby. "Mine Gott!
Mine Gott!" she wailed again, and although she spent five minutes in
apparent effort to evolve another and more suitable remark, her
research met with no greater success than the addition:

"He ain't a dog at all; he iss friends."

Miss Bailey had been sent to an eminently good college, and had been
instructed long and hard in psychology, so that she knew the
psychologic moment when she met it. She now arose with congratulations
and farewells. Mrs. Mowgelewsky arose also with Izzie still in her
arms. She lavished endearments upon him and caresses upon his short
black nose, and Izzie received them all with enthusiastic gratitude.

"And I think," said Miss Bailey in parting, "that you had better let
that dog come with me. He seems a nice enough little thing, quiet,
gentle, and very intelligent. He can live in the yard with Rover."

Morris turned his large eyes from one to another of his rulers, and
Izzie, also good at psychologic moments, stretched out a pointed pink
tongue and licked Mrs. Mowgelewsky's cheek. "This dog," said that lady
majestically, "iss mine. Nobody couldn't never to have him. When I was
in mine trouble, was it mans or was it ladies what takes und gives me
mine money back? No! Was it neighbors? No! Was it you, Miss Teacher,
mine friend? No! It was that dog. Here he stays mit me. Morris, my
golden one, you wouldn't to have no feelin's 'bout mamma havin' dogs?
You wouldn't to have mads?"

"No, ma'am," responded her obedient son; "Missis Bailey she says it's
_fer_ boys they should make all things what is lovin' mit cats und
dogs und horses."

"Goot," said his mother; "I guess, maybe, that ain't such a
foolishness."

It was not until nearly bedtime that Mrs. Mowgelewsky reverted to that
part of Miss Bailey's conversation immediately preceding the discovery
of the loss of the purse.

"So-o-oh, my golden one," she began, lying back in her chair with Izzie
on her lap--"so-o-oh, you had friends by the house when mamma was by
hospital."

"On'y one," Morris answered faintly.

"Well, I ain't scoldin'," said his mother. "Where iss your friend? I
likes I shall look on him. Ain't he comin' round to-night?"

"No ma'am," answered Morris, settling himself at her side, and laying
his head close to his friend. "He couldn't to go out by nights the
while he gets adopted off of a lady."




HAMLIN GARLAND

A Camping Trip


It was the fifteenth of June, and the sun glazed down upon the dry
cornfield as if it had a spite against Lincoln Stewart, who was riding
a gayly painted new sulky corn-plow, guiding the shovels with his feet.
The corn was about knee-high and rustled softly, almost as if
whispering, not yet large enough to speak aloud.

Working all day in a level field like this, with the sun burning one's
neck brown as a leather glove, is apt to make one dream of cool river
pools, where the water snakes wiggle to and fro, and the kingfishers
fly above the bright ripples in which the rock bass love to play.

It was about four o'clock, and Lincoln was tired. His neck ached, his
toes were swollen, and his tongue called for a drink of water. He got
off the plow, after turning the horses' heads to the faint western
breeze, and took a seat on the fence in the shade of a small popple
tree on which a king-bird had a nest.

Somebody was galloping up the road with a regular rise and fall in the
saddle which showed the perfect horseman and easy rider. It was Milton
Jennings.

"Hello, Lincoln!" shouted Milton.

"Hello, Milt," Lincoln returned. "Why ain't you at home workin' like an
honest man?"

"Better business on hand. I've come clear over here to-day to see
you----"

"Well, here I am."

"Let's go to Clear Lake."

Lincoln stared hard at him.

"D'ye mean it?"

"You bet I do! I can put in a horse. Bert Jenks will lend us his
boat--put it right on in place of the wagon box--and we can borrow
Captain Knapp's tent. We'll get Rance to go, too."

"I'm with you," said Lincoln, leaping down, his face aglow with the
idea. "But won't you go up and break it gently to the boss? He's got
his mind kind o' set on my goin' through this corn again. When'll we
start?"

"Let's see--to-day is Wednesday--we ought to get off on Monday."

"Well, now, if you don't mind, Milt, I'd like to have you go up and see
what Father says."

"I'll fix him," said Milton. "Where is he?"

"Right up the road, mending fence."

Lincoln was so tickled he not only leaped the fence, but sprang into
the plow seat from behind and started on another round, singing,
showing how instantly hope of play can lighten a boy's task. But when
he came back to the fence, Milton was not in sight, and his heart
fell--the outlook was not so assuring.

It was nearly an hour later when Milton came riding back. Lincoln
looked up and saw him wave his hand and heard his shout. The victory
was won. Mr. Stewart had consented.

Lincoln whooped with such wild delight that the horses, swerving to the
right, plowed up two rows of corn for several rods before they could be
brought back into place.

"It's all O.K.," Milton called. "But I've got to come over with my
team and help you go through the corn the other way."

From that on, nothing else was thought of or talked of. Each night the
four boys got together at Mr. Jennings's house, each one bringing
things that he thought he needed. They had never looked upon a sheet of
water larger than the mill-pond on the Cedar River, and the cool face
of that beautiful lake, of which they had heard so much, allured them.

The boat was carefully mended, and Rance, who was a good deal of a
sailor, naturally talked about making a sail for it.

Lists of articles were carefully drawn up thus:

    4 tin cups        4 knives and forks
    1 spider          1 kettle, etc.

At Sunday School the campers became the center of attraction for the
other small boys, and quite a number of them went home with Lincoln to
look over the vehicle--a common lumber wagon with a boat for the box,
projecting dangerously near the horses' tails and trailing far astern.
From the edges of the boat arose a few hoops, making a kind of cover,
like a prairie schooner.[100-1] In the box were "traps" innumerable in
charge of Bert, who was "chief cook and bottlewasher."

Each man's duty had been assigned. Lincoln was to take care of the
horses, Milton was to look after the tent and places to sleep, Rance
was treasurer, and Bert was the cook, with the treasurer to assist. All
these preparations amused an old soldier like Captain Knapp.

"Are you going to get back this fall?" he asked slyly, as he stood
about, enjoying the talk.

"We'll try to," replied Milton.

Yes, there the craft stood, all ready to sail at day-break, with no
wind or tide to prevent, and every boy who saw it said, "I wish I could
go." And the campers, not selfish in their fun, felt a pang of pity, as
they answered, "We wish you could, boys."

It was arranged that they were all to sleep in the ship that night, and
so as night fell and the visitors drew off, the four navigators went
into the kitchen, where Mrs. Jennings set out some bread and milk for
them.

"Now, boys, d'ye suppose you got bread enough?"

"We've got twelve loaves."

"Well, of course you can buy bread and milk, so I guess you won't
starve."

"I guess not--not with fish plenty," they assured her.

"Well, now, don't set up too late, _talkin'_ about gettin' off."

"We're goin' to turn right in, ain't we, boys?"

"You bet. We're goin' to get out of here before sun-up to-morrow
mornin'," replied Bert.

"Well, see't you do," said Mr. Jennings, who liked boys to have a good
time. "I'll be up long before you are."

"Don't be too sure o' that."

It was delicious going to bed in that curious place, with the stars
shining in and the katydids singing. It gave them all a new view of
life.

"Now, the first feller that wakes up, yell," said Bert, as he crept
under the blanket.

"First feller asleep, whistle," said Lincoln.

"That won't be you, that's sure," grumbled Rance, already dozing.

As a matter of fact, no one slept much. About two o'clock they began,
first one, and then the other:

"Say, boys, don't you think it's about time?"

"Boys, it's gettin' daylight in the east!"

"No, it ain't. That's the moon."

At last the first faint light of the sun appeared, and Lincoln rose,
fed the horses, and harnessed them while the other boys got everything
else in readiness.

Mr. Jennings came out soon, and Mrs. Jennings got some hot coffee for
them, and before the sun was anywhere near the horizon, they said
good-by and were off. Mr. Jennings shouted many directions about the
road, while Mrs. Jennings told them again to be careful on the water.

To tell the truth, the boys were a little fagged at first, but at last
as the sun rose, the robins began to chatter, and the bobolinks began
to ring their fairy bells, and the boys broke into song. For the first
hour or two the road was familiar and excited no interest, but then
they came upon new roads, new fields, and new villages. Streams curved
down the slopes and ran musically across the road, as if on purpose to
water their horses. Wells beside the fences under silver-leaf maples
invited them to stop and drink and lunch. Boys they didn't know, on
their way to work, stopped and looked at them enviously. How glorious
it all was!

The sun grew hot, and at eleven o'clock they drew up in a beautiful
grove of oaks, beside a swift and sparkling little river, for dinner
and to rest their sweaty team. They concluded to eat doughnuts and
drink milk for that meal, and this gave them time to fish a little and
swim a good deal, while the horses munched hay under the trees.

After a good long rest, they hitched the team in again and started on
toward the west. They had still half-way (twenty-five miles) to go. The
way grew stranger. The land, more broken and treeless, seemed very
wonderful to them. They came into a region full of dry lake-beds, and
Bert, who had a taste for geology, explained the cause of the valleys
so level at the bottom, and pointed out the old-time limits of the
water. As night began to fall, it seemed they had been a week on the
way.

At last, just as the sun was setting, they saw a dark belt of woods
ahead of them and came to a narrow river, which the farmers said was
the outlet of the lake. They pushed on faster, for the roads were
better, and just at dusk they drove into the little village street
which led down to the lake, to which their hungry eyes went out first
of all.

How glorious it looked, with its waves lapping the gravelly beach, and
the dark groves of trees standing purple-black against the orange sky.
They sat and gazed at it for several minutes without saying a word.
Finally Rance said, with a sigh, "Oh, wouldn't I like to jump into that
water!"

"Well, this won't do. We must get a camp," said Milton; and they pulled
the team into a road leading along the east shore of the lake.

"Where can a fellow camp?" Bert called to a young man who met them,
with a pair of oars on his back.

"Anywhere down in the woods." He pointed to the south.

They soon reached a densely wooded shore where no one stood guard, and
drove along an old wood road to a superb camping-place near the lake
shore under a fine oak grove.

"Whoa!" yelled Milton.

All hands leaped out. Milton and Lincoln took care of the horses. Bert
seized an axe and chopped on one side of two saplings, bent them
together, tied them, cleared away the brush around them, and with
Rance's help drew the tent cloth over them--this was the camp! While
they dug up the bedding and put it in place, Rance built a fire and set
some coffee boiling.

By the time they sat down to eat their bread and coffee and cold
chicken, the grove was dark. The smoke rose in a billowy mass,
vanishing in the dark, cool shadows of the oaks above. A breeze was
rising. Below them they could hear the lap of the waves on the
bowlders. It was all so fine, so enjoyable, that it seemed a dream from
which they were in danger of waking.

After eating, they all took hold of the boat and eased it down the bank
into the water.

"Now, who's goin' to catch the fish for breakfast?" asked Bert.

"I will," replied Rance, who was a "lucky" fisherman. "I'll have some
fish by sun-up--see if I don't."

Their beds were hay, with abundant quilts and blankets spread above,
and as Lincoln lay looking out of the tent door at the smoke curling
up, hearing the horses chewing and an owl hooting, it seemed gloriously
like the stories he had read, and the dreams he had had of sometime
being free from care and free from toil, far in the wilderness.

"I wish I could do this all the time," he said to Milton, who was
looking at the fire, his chin resting in his palms.

"I can tell better after a week of it," retorted Milton.

To a boy like Lincoln or Rance, that evening was worth the whole
journey, that strange, delicious hour in the deepening darkness, when
everything seemed of some sweet, remembered far-off world--they were in
truth living as their savage ancestry lived, close to nature's mystery.

The pensiveness did not prevent Milton from hitting Bert a tremendous
slap with a boot-leg, saying, "Hello! that mosquito pretty near had you
that time."

And Bert, familiar with Milton's pranks, turned upon him, and a rough
and tumble tussle went on till Rance cried out: "Look out there! You'll
be tippin' over my butter!"

At last the rustle of the leaves over their heads died out in dreams
and the boys fell asleep, deliciously tired, full of plans for the next
day.

Morning dawned, cool and bright, and Bert was stirring before sunrise.
Rance was out in the boat before the pink had come upon the lake, while
Milton was "skirmishing" for some milk.

How delicious that breakfast! Newly fried perch, new milk with bread
and potatoes from home--but the freedom, the strange familiarity of it
all! There in the dim, sweet woods, with the smoke curling up into the
leafy masses above, the sunlight just dropping upon the lake, the
killdee, the robin, and the blue jay crying in the still, cool morning
air. This was indeed life. The hot cornfields were far away.

Breakfast having been eaten to the last scrap of fish, they made a rush
for the lake and the boat. There it lay, moving a little on the light
waves, a frail little yellow craft without keel or rudder, but
something to float in, anyhow. There rippled the lake six miles long,
cool and sparkling, and boats were getting out into the mid-water like
huge "skimmer-bugs,"[105-1] carrying fisherman to their tasks.

While the other boys fished for perch and bass for dinner, Lincoln
studied the shore. The beach which was their boat-landing was made up
of fine, varicolored bowlders, many of them round as cannon balls, and
Lincoln thought of the thousands of years they been rolling and
grinding there, rounding each other and polishing each other till they
glistened like garnets and rubies. And then the sand!

He waded out into the clear yellow waters and examined the bottom,
which was set in tiny waves beautifully regular, the miniature reflexes
of the water in motion. It made him think of the little wind waves in
the snow, which he had often wondered at in winter.

Growing tired of this, he returned to the bank, and lying down on the
grass gave himself up to the rest and freedom and beauty of the day. He
no longer felt like "making the most of it." It seemed as if he were
always to live like this.

The others came in after awhile with a few bass and many perch which
were beautifully marked in pearl and gray, to correspond with the sand
bottom, though the boys didn't know that. There were no large fish so
near shore, and they lacked the courage to go far out, for the
whitecaps glittered now and then in mid-water.

They ate every "smidgin'" of the fish at dinner, and their larder
looked desperately bare. They went out into the deeper water, all
feeling a little timorous, as the little boat began to rock on the
waves.

Lincoln was fascinated with the water, which was so clear that he could
see fish swimming far below. The boat seemed floating in the air. At
times they passed above strange and beautiful forests of weeds and
grasses, jungles which scared him, for he remembered the story of a man
who had been caught and drowned by just such clinging weeds, and
besides, what monsters these mysterious places might conceal!

Other boats came around them. Sailboats passed, and the little steamer,
the pride of the lake, passed over to "the island." Yachts that seemed
to the boys immense went by, loaded with merrymakers. Everything was as
strange, as exciting, as if they were in a new world.

Rance was much taken by the sailboats. "I'm going to rig a sail on our
boat, or die tryin'," he declared.

He spent the whole afternoon at this work while the other boys played
ball and shot at a target, and by night was ready for a sail, though
the others were skeptical of results.

That second night was less restful. The mosquitoes bit and a loud
thunderstorm passed over. As they heard the roar of the falling rain on
the tent and the wet spatter in their faces, and heard the water
drip-drop on their bread-box, Milton and Lincoln wished themselves at
home.

It grew cooler toward morning and the mosquitoes left, so that they all
slept like bear cubs, rising fresh and rested.

It was a little discouraging at first. Everything was wet and the bread
was inclined to be mouldy and tasted of the box; but the birds were
singing, the sky was bright and cool, and a fresh western wind was
blowing.

Rance was eager to sail, and as soon as he had put away the breakfast,
he shouldered his mast.

"Come on, boys, now for the boat."

"I guess not," said Milton.

The boat was soon rigged with a little triangular sail, with an oar to
steer by, lashed in with wires. Lincoln finally had courage to get in,
and with beating heart Rance pushed off.

The sail caught the breeze, and the boat began to move.

"Hurrah!" Rance threw water on the sail; where he learned _that_ was a
mystery. The effect was felt at once. The cloth swelled, became
impervious to the wind, and the boat swept steadily forward.

Lincoln was cautious. "That is all right--the question is, can we get
back?"

"You wait an' see me tack."

"All right. Tack or nail, only let's see you get back where we started
from." Lincoln was skeptical of sailboats. He had heard about sailing
"just where you wanted to go," but he had his doubts about it.

The boat obeyed the rudder nicely, came around slowly, and started in
on a new tack smoothly and steadily. After this successful trip, the
boys did little else but sail.

"I'm going up to town with it after dinner," Rance announced. But when
they came out after dinner, they found the sky overcast and a strong
breeze blowing from the southwest.

Milton refused to experiment. "I'd sooner walk than ride in your boat,"
he explained.

"All right; you pays your money--you takes your choice," replied Rance.

The boat drove out into the lake steadily and swiftly, making the water
ripple at the stern delightfully; but when they got past a low-lying
island where the waves ran free, the ship began to heave and slide
wildly, and Lincoln grew a little pale and set in the face, which made
Rance smile.

"This is something like it. I'm going to go out about half a mile, then
strike straight for the town."

It was not long before he found the boat quite unmanageable. The long
oar crowded him nearly off the seat, as he tried to hold her straight
out into mid-water. She was flat-bottomed, and as she got into the
region of whitecaps, she began to be blown bodily with the wind.

Lincoln was excited, but not scared; he realized now that they were in
great danger. Rance continued to smile, but it was evident that he too
was thinking new thoughts. He held the sail with his right hand, easing
it off and holding it tight by looping the rope on a peg set in the
gunwhale. But it was impossible for Lincoln to help him. All depended
on him alone.

"Turn!--turn it!" shouted Lincoln. "Don't you see we can't get back?"

"I'm afraid of breakin' my rudder."

There lay the danger. The oar was merely lashed into a notch in the
stern, with wire. The leverage was very great, but Rance brought the
boat about and headed her for the town nearly three miles away.

They both thrilled with a sort of pleasure to feel the boat leap under
them as she caught the full force of the wind in her sail. If they
could hold her in that line, they were all right. She careened once
till she dipped water.

"Get on the edge!" commanded Rance, easing the sail off. Lincoln
climbed upon the edge of the little pine shell, scarcely eighteen
inches high, and the boat steadied. Both looked relieved.

The water was getting a lead color, streaked with foam, and the hissing
of the whitecaps had a curiously snaky sound, as they spit water into
the boat. The rocking had opened a seam in the bottom, and Lincoln was
forced to bail furiously.

Rance, though a boy of unusual strength, clear-headed and resolute in
time of danger, began to feel that he was master only for a time.

"I don't suppose this is much of a blow," he grunted, "but I don't see
any of the other boats out."

Lincoln glanced around him; all the boats, even the two-masters, were
in or putting in. Lightning began to run down the clouds in the west in
zigzag streams. The boat, from time to time, was swept sidewise out of
its course, but Rance dared not ease the sail for fear he could not
steer her, and besides he was afraid of the rapidly approaching squall.
If she turned sideways toward the wind, she would instantly fill.

He sat there, with the handle of the oar at his right hip, the rope in
his hand with one loop round the peg, and every time the gust struck
the sail he was lifted from his seat by the crowding of the oar and the
haul of the rope. His muscles swelled tense and rigid--the sweat poured
from his face; but he laughed when Lincoln, with reckless drollery,
began to shout a few nautical words.

"Luff,[111-1] you lubber--why don't you luff? Hard-a-port, there,
you'll have us playin' on the sand yet. That's right. All we got to do
is to hard-a-port when the wind blows."

The farther they went, the higher the waves rolled, till the boat
creaked and gaped under its strain, and the water began to come in
fast.

"Bail 'er out!" shouted the pilot. The thunder broke over their heads,
and far away to the left they could see rain and the water white with
foam, but they were nearing the beach at the foot of the street. A
crowd was watching them with motionless intensity.

They were now in the midst of a fleet of anchored boats. The blast
struck the sail, tearing it loose and filling the boat with water, but
Rance held to his rudder, and threading her way among the boats, the
little craft ran half her length upon the sand.

As Rance leaped ashore, he staggered with weakness. Both took shelter
in a near-by boathouse. The boat-keeper jeered at them: "Don't you know
any more'n to go out in such a _tub_ as that on a day like this? I
expected every minute to see you go over."

"We didn't," said Rance. "I guess we made pretty good time."

"Time! you'd better say time! If you'd been five minutes later, you'd
had _time_ enough."

It was a foolhardy thing--Rance could see it now as he looked out on
the mad water, and at the little flat, awkward boat on the sand.

An hour later, as they walked up the wood, they met the other boys
half-way on the road, badly scared.

"By golly! We thought you were goners," said Milton. "Why, we couldn't
see the boat after you got out a little ways. Looked like you were both
sittin' in the water."

They found the camp badly demoralized. Their blankets were wet and the
tent blown out of plumb, but they set to work clearing things up. The
rain passed and the sun came out again, and when they sat down to their
supper, the storm was far away.

It was glorious business to these prairie boys. Released from work in
the hot cornfields, in camp on a lovely lake, with nothing to do but
swim or doze when they pleased, they had the delicious feeling of being
travelers in a strange country--explorers of desert wilds, hunters and
fishers in the wildernesses of the mysterious West.

To Lincoln it was all so beautiful that it almost made him sad. When he
should have enjoyed every moment, he was saying to himself, "Day after
to-morrow we must start for home"--the happy days passed all too
swiftly.

Occasionally Milton said: "I wish I had one o' Mother's biscuits this
morning," or some such remark, but some one usually shied a potato at
him. Such remarks were heretical.

They explored the woods to the south, a wild jungle, which it was easy
to imagine quite unexplored. Some years before a gang of horse thieves
had lived there, and their grass-grown paths were of thrilling
interest, although the boys never quite cared to follow them to the
house where the shooting of the leader had taken place.

Altogether it was a wonderful week, and when they loaded up their boat
and piled their plunder in behind, it was with sad hearts. It was late
Saturday night when they drew up in Mr. Jennings's yard, but to show
that they were thoroughly hardened campers, they slept in the wagon
another night--at least three of them did. Milton shamelessly sneaked
away to his bed, and they did not miss him until morning.

Mrs. Jennings invited them all to breakfast and nobody refused. "Land
o' Goshen," said she, "you eat as if you were starved."

"We are," replied Bert.

"Oh, but it was fun, wasn't it, boys?" cried Lincoln.

"You bet it was. Let's go again next year."

"All right," said Milton; "raise your weapons and swear."

They all lifted their knives in solemn covenant to go again the
following year. But they never did. Of such changeful stuff are the
plans of youth!




DOROTHY CANFIELD FISHER

A Thread without a Knot


I

When the assistant in the history department announced to Professor
Endicott his intention of spending several months in Paris to complete
the research work necessary to his doctor's dissertation,[114-1] the
head of the department looked at him with an astonishment so
unflattering in its significance that the younger man laughed aloud.

"You didn't think I had it in me to take it so seriously, did you,
Prof?" he said, with his usual undisturbed and amused perception of the
other's estimate of him. "And you're dead right, too! I'm doing it
because I've got to, that's all. It's borne in on me that you can't
climb up very fast in modern American universities unless you've got a
doctor's degree, and you can't be a Ph.D. without having dug around
some in a European library. I've picked out a subject that needs just
as little of that as any--you know as well as I do that right here in
Illinois I can find out everything that's worth knowing about the early
French explorers of the Mississippi--but three months in the
Archives[114-2] in Paris ought to put a polish on my dissertation that
will make even Columbia and Harvard sit up and blink. Am I right in my
calculations?"

Professor Endicott's thin shoulders executed a resigned shrug. "You are
always right in your calculations, my dear Harrison," he said; adding,
with an ambiguous intonation, "And I suppose I am to salute in you the
American scholar of the future."

Harrison laughed again without resentment, and proceeded indulgently to
reassure his chief. "No, sir, you needn't be alarmed. There'll always
be enough American-born scholars to keep you from being lonesome, just
as there'll always be others like me, that don't pretend to have a
drop of real scholar's blood in them. I want to _teach!_--to teach
history!--American history!--teach it to fool young undergraduates who
don't know what kind of a country they've got, nor what they ought to
make out of it, now they've got it. And I'm going in to get a Ph. D.
the same way I wear a stiff shirt and collars and cuffs, not because I
was brought up to believe in them as necessary to salvation--because I
wasn't, Lord knows!--but because there's a prejudice in favor of them
among the people I've got to deal with." He drew a long breath and went
on, "Besides, Miss Warner and I have been engaged about long enough. I
want to earn enough to get married on, and Ph. D. means advancement."

Professor Endicott assented dryly: "That is undoubtedly just what it
means nowadays. But you will 'advance,' as you call it, under any
circumstances. You will not remain a professor of history. I give you
ten years to be president of one of our large Western universities."

His accent made the prophecy by no means a compliment, but Harrison
shook his hand with undiminished good-will. "Well, Prof, if I am, my
first appointment will be to make you head of the history department
with twice the usual salary, and only one lecture a week to deliver to
a class of four P.G's--post-graduates, you know. I know a scholar when
I see one, if I don't belong to the tribe myself, and I know how they
ought to be treated."

If, in his turn, he put into a neutral phrase an ironical significance,
it was hidden by the hearty and honest friendliness of his keen, dark
eyes as he delivered this farewell.

The older man's ascetic face relaxed a little. "You are a good fellow,
Harrison, and I'm sure I wish you any strange sort of success you
happen to desire."

"Same to you, Professor. If I thought it would do any good, I'd run
down from Paris to Munich[116-1] with a gun and try scaring the editor
of the _Central-Blatt_ into admitting that you're right about that
second clause in the treaty of Utrecht."[116-2]

Professor Endicott fell back into severity. "I'm afraid," he observed,
returning to the papers on his desk, "I'm afraid that would not be a
very efficacious method of determining a question of historical
accuracy."

Harrison settled his soft hat firmly on his head. "I suppose you're
right," he remarked, adding as he disappeared through the door, "But
more's the pity!"


II

He made short work of settling himself in Paris, taking a cheap
furnished room near the Bibliotheque Nationale,[117-1] discovering at
once the inexpensive and nourishing qualities of _cremeries_ and
the Duval restaurants, and adapting himself to the eccentricities of
Paris weather in March with flannel underwear and rubber overshoes. He
attacked the big folios in the library with ferocious energy, being the
first to arrive in the huge, quiet reading-room, and leaving it only at
the imperative summons of the authorities. He had barely enough money
to last through March, April, and May, and, as he wrote in his long
Sunday afternoon letters to Maggie Warner, he would rather work fifteen
hours a day now while he was fresh at it, than be forced to, later on,
when decent weather began, and when he hoped to go about a little and
make some of the interesting historical pilgrimages in the environs of
Paris.

He made a point of this writing his fiancee every detail of his plans,
as well as all the small happenings of his monotonous and laborious
life; and so, quite naturally, he described to her the beginning of his
acquaintance with Agatha Midland.

    "I'd spotted her for English," he wrote, "long before I happened to
    see her name on a notebook. Don't it sound like a made-up name out
    of an English novel? And that is the way she looks, too. I
    understand now why no American girl is ever called Agatha. To fit
    it you have to look sort of droopy all over, as if things weren't
    going to suit you, but you couldn't do anything to help it, and did
    not, from sad experience, have any rosy hopes that somebody would
    come along to fix things right. I'm not surprised that when English
    women do get stirred up over anything--for instance, like voting,
    nowadays--they fight like tiger-cats. If this Agatha-person is a
    fair specimen, they don't look as though they were used to getting
    what they want any other way. But here I go, like every other fool
    traveler, making generalizations about a whole nation from seeing
    one specimen. On the other side of me from Miss Midland usually
    sits an old German, grubbing away at Sanskrit roots. The other day
    we got into talk in the little lunchroom here in the same building
    with the library, where all we readers go to feed, and he made me
    so mad I couldn't digest my bread and milk. Once, just once, when
    he was real young, he met an American woman student--a regular P.
    G. freak, I gather--and nothing will convince him that all American
    girls aren't like her. 'May God forgive Christopher Columbus!' he
    groans whenever he thinks of her...."

There was no more in this letter about his English neighbor, but in the
next, written a week later, he said:

    "We've struck up an acquaintance, the discouraged-looking English
    girl and I, and she isn't so frozen-up as she seems. This is how it
    happened. I told you about the little lunchroom where the readers
    from the library get their noonday feed. Well, a day or so ago I
    was sitting at the next table to her, and when she'd finished
    eating and felt for her purse, I saw her get pale, and I knew right
    off she'd lost her money. 'If you'll excuse me, Miss Midland,' I
    said, 'I'll be glad to loan you a little. My name is Harrison,
    Peter Harrison, and I usually sit next you in the reading-room.'
    Say, Maggie, you don't know how queerly she looked at me. I can't
    tell you what her expression was like, for I couldn't make head or
    tail out of it. It was like looking at a Hebrew book that you don't
    know whether to read backward or forward. She got whiter, and drew
    away and said something about 'No! No! she couldn't think----' But
    there stood the waiter with his hand out. I couldn't stop to figure
    out if she was mad or scared. I said 'Look-y-here, Miss Midland,
    I'm an American--here's my card--I just want to help you out,
    that's all. You needn't be afraid I'll bother you any.' And with
    that I asked the waiter how much it was, paid him, and went out for
    my usual half-hour constitutional in the little park opposite the
    library.

    "When I went back to the reading-room, she was there in the seat
    next me, all right, but my, wasn't she buried in a big folio! She's
    studying in some kind of old music-books. You would have laughed to
    see how she didn't know I existed. I forgot all about her till
    closing-up time, but when I got out in the court a little ahead of
    her, I found it was raining and blowing to beat the cars, and I
    went back to hunt her up, I being the only person that knew she was
    broke. There she was, moping around in the vestibule under one of
    those awful pancake hats English women wear. I took out six
    cents--it costs that to ride in the omnibuses here--and I marched
    up to her. 'Miss Midland,' I said, 'excuse me again, but the
    weather is something terrible. You can't refuse to let me loan you
    enough to get home in a 'bus, for you would certainly catch your
    death of cold, not to speak of spoiling your clothes, if you tried
    to walk in this storm.'

    "She looked at me queerly again, drew in her chin, and said very
    fierce, 'No, certainly not! Some one always comes to fetch me
    away.'

    "Of course I didn't believe a word of _that_! It was just a bluff
    to keep from seeming to need anything. So I smiled at her and said,
    'That's all right, but suppose something happens this evening so he
    doesn't get here. I guess you'd better take the six sous--they
    won't hurt you any.' And I took hold of her hand, put the coppers
    in it, shut her fingers, took off my hat, and skipped out before
    she could get her breath. There are a _few_ times when women are so
    contrary you can't do the right thing by them without bossing them
    around a little.

    "Well, I thought sure if she'd been mad at noon she'd just be
    hopping mad over that last, but the next morning she came up to me
    in the vestibule and smiled at me, the funniest little wavery
    smile, as though she were trying on a brand-new expression. It made
    her look almost pretty. 'Good morning, Mr. Harrison,' she said in
    that soft, singsong tone English women have, 'here is your loan
    back again. I hope I have the sum you paid for my lunch
    correct--and thank you very much.'

    "I hated to take her little money, for her clothes are awfully
    plain and don't look as though she had any too much cash, but of
    course I did, and even told her that I'd given the waiter a
    three-cent tip she'd forgotten to figure in. When you _can_, I
    think it's only the square thing to treat women like human beings
    with sense, and I knew how I'd feel about being sure I'd returned
    all of a loan from a stranger. 'Oh, thank you for telling me,' she
    said, and took three more coppers out of her little purse; and by
    gracious! we walked into the reading-room as friendly as could be.

    "That was last Wednesday, and twice since then we've happened to
    take lunch at the same table, and have had a regular visit. It
    tickles me to see how scared she is yet of the idea that she's
    actually talking to a real man that hasn't been introduced to her,
    but I find her awfully interesting, she's so different."


III

During the week that followed this letter, matters progressed rapidly.
The two Anglo-Saxons took lunch together every day, and by Friday the
relations between them were such that, as they pushed back their
chairs, Harrison said: "Excuse me, Miss Midland, for seeming to dictate
to you _all_ the time, but why in the world don't you go out after
lunch and take a half-hour's walk as I do? It'd be a lot better for
your health."

The English girl looked at him with the expression for which he had as
yet found no word more adequately descriptive than his vague "queer."
"I haven't exactly the habit of walking about Paris streets alone, you
know," she said.

"Oh, yes, to be sure," returned the American. "I remember hearing that
young ladies can't do that here the way they do back home. But that's
easy fixed. You won't be out in the streets, and you won't be alone, if
you come out with me in the little park opposite. Come on! It's the
first spring day."

Miss Midland dropped her arms with a gesture of helpless wonder. "Well,
_really_!" she exclaimed. "_Do_ you think that so much better?" But
she rose and prepared to follow him, as if her protest could not stand
before the kindly earnestness of his manner. "There!" he said, after he
had guided her across the street into the tiny green square where in
the sudden spring warmth, the chestnut buds were already swollen and
showing lines of green. "To answer your question, I think it not only
better, but absolutely all right--O.K!"

They were sitting on a bench at one side of the fountain, whose
tinkling splash filled the momentary silence before she answered, "I
can't make it all out--" she smiled at him--"but I think you are right
in saying that it is all O.K." He laughed, and stretched out his long
legs comfortably. "You've got the idea. That's the way to get the good
of traveling and seeing other kinds of folks. You learn my queer slang
words, and I'll learn yours."

Miss Midland stared again, and she cried out, "_My_ queer slang words!
What can you mean?"

He rattled off a glib list: "Why, 'just fancy now,' and 'only think of
that!' and 'I dare say, indeed,' and a lot more."

"But they are not queer!" she exclaimed.

"They sound just as queer to me as 'O.K.' and 'I guess' do to you!" he
said triumphantly.

She blinked her eyes rapidly, as though taking in an inconceivable
idea, while he held her fixed with a steady gaze which lost none of its
firmness by being both good-humored and highly amused. Finally,
reluctantly, she admitted, "Yes, I see. You mean I'm insular."

"Oh, as to that, I mean we both are--that is, we are as ignorant as
stotin'-bottles of each other's ways of doing things. Only I want to
find out about your ways, and you don't about----"

She broke in hastily, "Ah, but I do want to find out about yours!
You--you make me very curious indeed." As she said this, she looked
full at him with a grave simplicity which was instantly reflected on
his own face.

"Well, Miss Midland," he said slowly, "maybe now's a good time to say
it, and maybe it's a good thing to say, since you _don't_ know about
our ways--to give you a sort of declaration of principles. I wasn't
brought up in very polite society--my father and mother were Iowa
farmer-folks, and I lost them early, and I've had to look out for
myself ever since I was fourteen, so I'm not very long on _polish_; but
let me tell you, as they say about other awkward people, I _mean_ well.
We're both poor students working together in a foreign country, and
maybe I can do something to make it pleasanter for you, as I would for
a fellow-student woman in my country. If I can, I'd like to, fine! I
want to do what's square by everybody, and by women specially. I don't
think they get a fair deal mostly. I think they've got as much sense as
men, and lots of them more, and I like to treat them accordingly. So
don't you mind if I do some Rube things that seem queer to you, and do
remember that you can be dead sure that I _never_ mean any harm."

He finished this speech with an urgent sincerity in his voice, quite
different from his usual whimsical note, and for a moment they looked
at each other almost solemnly, the girl's lips parted, her blue eyes
wide and serious. She flushed a clear rose-pink. "Why!" she said, "Why,
I _believe_ you!" Harrison broke the tension with a laugh. "And what is
there so surprising if you do?"

"I don't think," she said slowly, "that I ever saw any one before whom
I would believe if he said that last."

"Dear me!" cried Harrison, gaily, getting to his feet. "You'll make me
think you are a hardened cynic. Well, if you believe me, _that's_ all
right! And now, come on, let's walk a little, and you tell me why
English people treat their girls so differently from their boys. You
are a perfect gold mine of information to me, do you know it?"

"But I've always taken for granted most of the things you find so queer
about our ways. I thought that was the way they were, don't you see, by
the nature of things."

"_Aha_!" he said triumphantly. "You see another good of traveling! It
stirs a person up. If you can give me a lot of new facts, maybe I can
pay you back by giving you some new ideas."

"I think," said Miss Midland, with a soft energy, "I think you can,
indeed."


IV

A week after this was the first of April, and when Harrison, as was his
wont, reached the reading-room a little before the opening hour, he
found a notice on the door to the effect that the fall of some
plastering from a ceiling necessitated the closing of the reading-room
for that day. A week of daily lunches and talks with Miss Midland had
given him the habit of communicating his ideas to her, and he waited
inside the vestibule for her to appear. He happened thus, as he had not
before, to see her arrival. Accompanied by an elderly person in black,
who looked, even to Harrison's inexperienced eyes, like a maid-servant,
she came rapidly in through the archway which led from the street to
the court. Here, halting a moment, she dismissed her attendant with a
gesture, and, quite unconscious of the young man's gaze upon her,
crossed the court diagonally with a free, graceful step. Observing her
thus at his leisure, Harrison was moved to the first and almost the
last personal comment upon his new friend. He did not as a rule notice
very keenly the outward aspect of his associates. "Well, by gracious,"
he said to himself, "if she's not quite a good-looker!--or would be if
she had money or gumption enough to put on a little more style!"

He took a sudden resolution and, meeting her at the foot of the steps,
laid his plan enthusiastically before her. It took her breath away.
"Oh, no, I _couldn't_," she exclaimed, looking about her helplessly as
if foreseeing already that she would yield. "What would people----?"

"Nobody would say a thing, because nobody would know about it. We could
go and get back here by the usual closing time, so that whoever comes
for you would never suspect--she's not very sharp, is she?"

"No, no. She's only what you would call my hired girl."

"Well, then, it's Versailles[125-1] for us. Here, give me your
portfolio to carry. Let's go by the tram line[125-2]--it's cheaper for
two poor folks."

On the way out he proposed, with the same thrifty motive, that they buy
provisions in the town, before they began their sight-seeing in the
chateau, and eat a picnic lunch somewhere in the park.

"Oh, anything you please now!" she answered with reckless
light-heartedness. "I'm quite lost already."

"There's nothing disreputable about eating sandwiches on the grass," he
assured her; and indeed, when they spread their simple provision out
under the great pines back of the Trianon, she seemed to agree with
him, eating with a hearty appetite, laughing at all his jokes, and,
with a fresh color and sparkling eyes, telling him that she had never
enjoyed a meal more.

"Good for you! That's because you work too hard at your old history of
music."--By this time each knew all the details of the other's
research--"You ought to have somebody right at hand to make you take
vacations and have a good time once in a while. You're too
conscientious."

Then, because he was quite frank and unconscious himself, he went on
with a simplicity which the most accomplished actor could not have
counterfeited, "That's what I'm always telling Maggie--Miss Warner.
She's the girl I'm engaged to."

He did not at the time remark, but afterward, in another land, he was
to recall with startling vividness the quick flash of her clear eyes
upon him and the fluttering droop of her eyelids. She finished her
eclair quietly, remarking, "So you are engaged?"

"Very much so," answered Harrison, leaning his back against the
pine-tree and closing his eyes, more completely to savor the faint
fragrance of new life which rose about them in the warm spring air,
like unseen incense.

Miss Midland stood up, shaking the crumbs from her skirt, and began
fitting her gloves delicately upon her slim and very white hands. After
a pause, "But how would she like _this_?" she asked.

Without opening his eyes, Harrison murmured, "She'd like it fine. She's
a great girl for outdoors."

His companion glanced down at him sharply, but in his tranquil and
half-somnolent face there was no trace of evasiveness. "I don't mean
the park, the spring weather," she went on, with a persistence which
evidently cost her an effort. "I mean your being here with another
girl. That would make an English woman jealous."

Harrison opened his dark eyes wide and looked at her in surprise. "You
don't understand--we're not flirting with each other, Maggie and
I--we're engaged." He added with an air of proffering a self-evident
explanation, "As good as married, you know."

Miss Midland seemed to find in the statement a great deal of material
for meditation, for after an "Ah!" which might mean anything, she sat
down on the other side of the tree, leaning her blonde head against its
trunk and staring up into the thick green branches. Somewhere near them
in an early-flowering yellow shrub a bee droned softly. After a time
she remarked as if to herself, "They must take marriage very seriously
in Iowa."

The young man aroused himself, to answer sleepily: "It's Illinois where
I live now--Iowa was where I grew up--but it's all the same. Yes, we
do."

After that there was another long, fragrant silence which lasted until
Harrison roused himself with a sigh, exclaiming that although he would
like nothing better than to sit right there till he took root, they had
yet to "do" the two Trianons and to see the state carriages. During
this sightseeing tour he repeated his performance of the morning in the
chateau, pouring out a flood of familiar, quaintly expressed historical
lore of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, which made his
astonished listener declare he must have lived at that time.

"Nope!" he answered her. "Got it all out of Illinois libraries. Books
are great things if you're only willing to treat them right. And
history--by gracious! history is a study fit for the gods! All about
folks, and they are all that are worth while in the world!"

They were standing before the Grand Trianon as he said this, waiting
for the tram car, and as it came into sight he cried out artlessly, his
dark, aquiline face glowing with fervor, "I--I just _love_ folks!"

She looked at him curiously. "In all my life I never knew any one
before to say or think that." Some of his enthusiasm was reflected upon
her own fine, thoughtful face as a sort of wistfulness when she added,
"It must make you very happy. I wish I could feel so."

"You don't look at them right," he protested.

She shook her head. "No, we haven't known the same kind. I had never
even heard of the sort of people you seem to have known."

The tram car came noisily up to them, and no more was said.


V

A notice posted the following day to the effect that for some time the
reading-room would be closed one day in the week for repairs, gave
Harrison an excuse for insisting on weekly repetitions of what he
called their historical picnics.

Miss Midland let herself be urged into these with a half-fearful
pleasure which struck the young American as pathetic. "Anybody can see
she's had mighty few good times in _her_ life," he told himself. They
"did" Fontainebleau,[129-1] Pierrefonds,[129-2] Vincennes,[129-3] and
Chantilly[129-4]--this last expedition coming in the first week of May,
ten days before Miss Midland was to leave Paris. They were again
favored by wonderfully fine spring weather, so warm that the girl
appeared in a light-colored cotton gown and a straw hat which, as her
friend told her, with the familiarity born of a month of almost
uninterrupted common life, made her look "for all the world like a
picture."

After their usual conscientious and minute examination of the objects
of historical interest, they betook themselves with their lunch-basket
to a quiet corner of the park, by a clear little stream, on the other
side of which a pair of white swans were building a nest. It was very
still, and what faint breeze there was barely stirred the trees. The
English girl took off her hat, and the sunlight on her blonde hair
added another glory to the spring day.

They ate their lunch with few words, and afterward sat in what seemed
to the American the most comfortable and companionable of silences,
idly watching a peacock unfold the flashing splendor of his plumage
before the old gray fountain. "My! My! My!" he murmured finally. "Isn't
the world about the best place!"

The girl did not answer, and, glancing at her, he was startled to see
that her lips were quivering. "Why, Miss Midland!" he cried anxiously.
"Have you had bad news?"

She shook her head. "Nothing new."

"What's the matter?" he asked, coming around in front of her. "Perhaps
I can help you even if it's only to give some good advice."

She looked up at him with a sudden flash. "I suppose that, since you
are so much engaged, you think you would make a good father-confessor!"

"I don't see that that has anything to do with it," he said, sitting
down beside her, "but you can bank on me for doing anything I can."

"You don't see that that has anything to do with it," she broke in
sharply, with the evident intention of wounding him, "because you are
very unworldly, what is usually called very unsophisticated."

If she had thought to pique him with this adjective, she was disarmed
by the heartiness of his admission, "As green as grass! But I'd like to
help you all the same, if I can."

"You don't care if you are?" she asked curiously.

"Lord no! What does it matter?"

"You may care then to know," she went on, still probing at him, "that
your not caring is the principal reason for my--finding you
interesting--for my liking you--as I do."

"Well, I'm interested to know that," he said reasonably, "but blessed
if I can see why. What difference does it make to _you_?"

"It's a great surprise to me," she said clearly. "I never met anybody
before who didn't care more about being sophisticated than about
anything else. To have you not even think of that--to have you think of
nothing but your work and how to 'mean well' as you say----" she
stopped, flushing deeply.

"Yes, it must be quite a change," he admitted sobered by her tone, but
evidently vague as to her meaning. "Well, I'm very glad you don't mind
my being as green as grass and as dense as a hitching-block. It's very
lucky for me."

A quick bitterness sprang into her voice. "I don't see," she echoed his
phrase, "what difference it makes to _you_!"

"Don't you?" he said, lighting a cigarette and not troubling himself to
discuss the question with her. She was evidently all on edge with
nerves, he thought, and needed to be calmed down. He pitied women for
their nerves, and was always kindly tolerant of the resultant
petulances.

She frowned and said with a tremulous resentment, as if gathering
herself together for a long-premediated attempt at self-defense.
"You're not only as green as grass, but you perceive nothing,--any
European, even the stupidest, would perceive what you--but you are as
primitive as a Sioux Indian, you have the silly morals of a
non-conformist preacher,--you're as brutal as----"

He opposed to this outburst the impregnable wall of a calm and
meditative silence. She looked angrily into his quiet eyes, which met
hers with unflinching kindness. The contrast between their faces was
striking--was painful.

She said furiously, "There is nothing to you except that you are
stronger than I, and you know it--and that _is_ brutal!" She paused a
long moment, quivering, and then relapsed into spent, defeated
lassitude,--"and I like it," she added under her breath, looking down
at her hands miserably.

"I don't mean to be brutal," he said peaceably. "I'm sorry if I am."

"Oh, it's no matter!" she said impatiently.

"All right, have it your own way," he agreed, good-naturedly, shifting
into a more comfortable position, and resuming his patient silence. He
might have been a slightly pre-occupied but indulgent parent, waiting
for a naughty child to emerge from a tantrum.

After a while, "Well, then," she began as though nothing had passed
between them since his offer to give her advice, "well then, if you
want to be father-confessor, tell me what you'd do in my place, if your
family expected you as a matter of course to--to----"

"What do they want you to do?" he asked as she hesitated.

"Oh, nothing that they consider at all formidable! Only what every girl
should do--make a good and suitable marriage, and bring up children to
go on doing what she had found no joy in."

"Don't you do it!" he said quietly. "Nobody believes more than I do in
marrying the right person. But just marrying so's to _be_ married--that's
Tophet! Red-hot Tophet!"[133-1]

"But what else is there for me to do?" she said, turning her eyes to
him with a desperate hope in his answer. "Tell me! My parents have
brought me up so that there is nothing I can fill my life with, if--I
think, on the whole, I will be more miserable if I don't than if I----"

"Why, look-y-here!" he said earnestly. "You're not a child, you're a
grown woman. You have your music. You could earn your living by that.
Great Scott! Earn your living scrubbing floors before you----"

She put her handkerchief to her eyes. "Ah, but I am so alone against
all my world! Now, here, with you, it seems easy but--without any one
to sustain me, to----"

Harrison went on: "Now let me give you a rule I believe in as I do in
the sun's rising. Never marry a man just because you think you could
manage to live with him. Don't do it unless you are dead sure you
couldn't live without him!"

She took down her handkerchief, showing a white face, whose expression
matched the quaver in her voice, as she said breathlessly: "But how if
I meet a man and feel I cannot live without him, and he is already--"
she brought it out squarely in the sunny peace,--"if he is already as
good as married!"

He took it with the most single-hearted simplicity. "Now it's you who
are unsophisticated and getting your ideas from fool novels. Things
don't happen that way in real life. Either the man keeps his marriage a
secret, in which case he is a sneak and not worth a second thought from
any decent woman, or else, if she had known all along that he was
married, she doesn't get to liking him that way. Don't you see?"

She looked away, down the stream for a moment with inscrutable eyes,
and then broke into an unexpected laugh, rising at the same time and
putting on her hat. "I see, yes, I see," she said. "It is as you say,
quite simple. And now let us go to visit the rest of the park."


VI

The next excursion was to be their last, and Miss Midland had suggested
a return to Versailles to see the park in its spring glory. They
lunched in a little inclosure, rosy with the pink and white magnolia
blossoms, where the uncut grass was already ankle-deep and the
rose-bushes almost hid the gray stone wall with the feathery abundance
of their first pale green leaves. From a remark of the girl's that
perhaps this was the very spot where Marie Antoinette had once gathered
about her gay court of pseudo-milkmaids, they fell into a discussion of
that queen's pretty pastoral fancy. Harrison showed an unexpected
sympathy with the futile, tragic little merrymaker.

"I expect she got sick and tired of being treated like a rich, great
lady, and wanted to see what it would feel like to be a human being.
The king is always disguising himself as a goat-herd to make sure he
can be loved for his own sake."

"But those stories are all so monotonous!" she said impatiently. "The
king always is made to find out that the shepherdess does love him for
his own sake. What would happen if she wouldn't look at him?"

Harrison laughed, "Well, by George, I never thought of that. I should
say if he cared enough about her to want his own way, he'd better get
off his high-horse and say, 'Look-y-here, I'm not the common ordinary
mutt I look. I'm the king in disguise. _Now_ will you have me?"

Miss Midland looked at him hard. "Do you think it likely the girl would
have him then?"

"Don't you?" he said, still laughing, and tucking away the last of a
foie-gras sandwich.

She turned away, frowning, "I don't see how you can call _me_ cynical!"

He raised his eyebrows, "That's not cynical," he protested. "You have
to take folks the way they are, and not the way you think it would be
pretty to have them. It mightn't be the most dignified position for the
king, but I never did see the use of dignity that got in the way of
your having what you wanted."

She looked at him with so long and steady a gaze that only her patent
absence of mind kept it from being a stare. Then, "I think I will go
for a walk by myself," she said.

"Sure, if you want to," he assented, "and I'll take a nap under this
magnolia tree. I've been working late nights, lately."

When she came back after an hour, the little inclosure was quite still,
and, walking over to the magnolia, she saw that the young man had
indeed fallen soundly asleep, one arm under his head, the other flung
wide, half buried in the grass. For a long time she looked down gravely
at the powerful body, at the large, sinewy hand, relaxed like a
sleeping child's, at the eagle-like face, touchingly softened by its
profound unconsciousness.

Suddenly the dark eyes opened wide into hers. The young man gave an
exclamation and sat up, startled. At this movement she looked away,
smoothing a fold of her skirt. He stared about him, still half-asleep.
"Did I hear somebody call?" he asked. "I must have had a very vivid
dream of some sort--I thought somebody was calling desperately to me.
You didn't speak, did you?"

"No," she answered softly, "I said nothing."

"Well, I hope you'll excuse me for being such poor company. I only
meant to take a cat-nap. I hope we won't be too late for the train."

He scrambled to his feet, his eyes still heavy with sleep, and pulled
out his watch. As he did this, Miss Midland began to speak very
rapidly. What she said was so astonishing to him that he forgot to put
back his watch, forgot even to look at it, and stood with it in his
hand, staring at her, with an expression as near to stupefaction as his
keen and powerful face could show.

When she finally stopped to draw breath, the painful breath of a person
who has been under water too long, he broke into baroque ejaculations,
"Well, wouldn't that _get_ you! Wouldn't that absolutely freeze you to
a pillar of salt! Well, of all the darndest idiots, I've been the----"
With Miss Midland's eyes fixed on him, he broke into peal after peal
of his new-world laughter, his fresh, crude, raw, inimitably vital
laughter, "I'm thinking of the time I loaned you the franc and a half
for your lunch, and hated to take it back because I thought you needed
it--and you rich enough to buy ten libraries to Andy's[137-1] one! Say,
how did you keep your face straight!"

Miss Midland apparently found no more difficulty in keeping a straight
face now than then. She did not at all share his mirth. She was still
looking at him with a strained gaze as though she saw him with
difficulty, through a mist increasingly smothering. Finally, as though
the fog had grown quite too thick, she dropped her eyes, and very
passive, waited for his laughter to stop.

When it did, and the trees which had looked down on Marie Antoinette
had ceased echoing to the loud, metallic, and vigorous sound, he
noticed his watch still in his hand. He glanced at it automatically,
thrust it back into his pocket and exclaimed, quite serious again,
"Look-y-here. We'll have to step lively if we are going to catch that
train back to Paris, Miss Midland--Lady Midland, I mean,--Your
highness--what _do_ they call the daughter of an Earl? I never met
a real live member of the aristocracy before."

She moved beside him as he strode off towards the gate. "I am usually
called Lady Agatha," she answered, in a flat tone.

"How pretty that sounds!" he said heartily, "Lady Agatha! Lady Agatha!
Why don't we have some such custom in America?" He tried it
tentatively. "Lady Marietta--that's my mother's name--don't seem to fit
altogether does it? Lady Maggie--Oh, Lord! awful! No, I guess we'd
better stick to Miss and Mrs. But it _does_ fit Agatha fine!"

She made no rejoinder. She looked very tired and rather stern.

After they were on the train, she said she had a headache and preferred
not to talk and, ensconcing herself in a corner of the compartment,
closed her eyes. Harrison, refreshed by the outdoor air and his nap,
opened his notebook and began puzzling over a knotty point in one of
the French Royal Grants to LaSalle[138-1] which he was engaged at the
time in deciphering. Once he glanced up to find his companion's eyes
open and fixed on him. He thought to himself that her headache must be
pretty bad, and stirred himself to say with his warm, friendly accent,
"It's a perfect shame you feel so miserable! Don't you want me to open
the window? Wouldn't you like my coat rolled up for a pillow? Isn't
there something I can do for you?"

She looked at him, and closing her lips, shook her head.

Later, in the midst of a struggle over an archaic law-form, the
recollection of his loan to his fellow-student darted into his head. He
laid down his notebook to laugh again. She turned her head and looked a
silent question. "Oh, it's just that franc and a half!" he explained.
"I'll never get over that as long as I live!"

She pulled down her veil and turned away from him again.

When they reached Paris, he insisted that she take a carriage and go
home directly. "I'll go on to the reading-room and explain to your
hired girl that you were sick and couldn't wait for her." Before he
closed her into the cab he added, "But, look here! I won't see you
again, will I? I forgot you are going back to England to-morrow. Well,
to think of this being good-bye! I declare, I hate to say it!" He held
out his hand and took her cold fingers in his. "Well, Miss Midland, I
tell _you_ there's not a person in the world who can wish you better
luck than I do. You've been awfully good to me, and I appreciate it,
and I do hope that if there's ever any little thing I can do for you,
you'll let me know. I surely am yours to command."

The girl's capacity for emotion seemed to be quite exhausted, for she
answered nothing to this quaint valedictory beyond a faint, "Good-by,
Mr. Harrison, I hope you----" but she did not finish the sentence.




FRANCIS BRET HARTE

Chu Chu


I do not believe that the most enthusiastic lover of that "useful and
noble animal," the horse, will claim for him the charm of geniality,
humor, or expansive confidence. Any creature who will not look you
squarely in the eye--whose only oblique glances are inspired by fear,
distrust, or a view to attack, who has no way of returning caresses,
and whose favorite expression is one of head-lifting disdain, may be
"noble" or "useful," but can be hardly said to add to the gayety of
nations. Indeed it may be broadly stated that, with the single
exception of gold-fish, of all animals kept for the recreation of
mankind the horse is alone capable of exciting a passion that shall be
absolutely hopeless. I deem these general remarks necessary to prove
that my unreciprocated affection for Chu Chu was not purely individual
or singular. And I may add that to these general characteristics she
brought the waywardness of her capricious sex.

She came to me out of the rolling dust of an emigrant wagon, behind
whose tailboard she was gravely trotting. She was a half-broken
colt--in which character she had at different times unseated everybody
in the train--and, although covered with dust, she had a beautiful coat
and the most lambent gazelle-like eyes I had ever seen. I think she
kept these latter organs purely for ornament--apparently looking at
things with her nose, her sensitive ears, and sometimes even a slight
lifting of her slim near foreleg. On our first interview I thought she
favored me with a coy glance, but as it was accompanied by an
irrelevant "Look out!" from her owner, the teamster, I was not certain.
I only know that after some conversation, a good deal of mental
reservation, and the disbursement of considerable coin, I found myself
standing in the dust of the departing emigrant wagon with one end of a
forty-foot _riata_ in my hand and Chu Chu at the other.

I pulled invitingly at my own end and even advanced a step or two
towards her. She then broke into a long disdainful pace and began to
circle round me at the extreme limit of her tether. I stood admiring
her free action for some moments--not always turning with her, which
was tiring--until I found that she was gradually winding herself up _on
me_! Her frantic astonishment when she suddenly found herself thus
brought up against me was one of the most remarkable things I ever saw
and nearly took me off my legs. Then when she had pulled against the
_riata_ until her narrow head and prettily arched neck were on a
perfectly straight line with it, she as suddenly slackened the tension
and condescended to follow me, at an angle of her own choosing.
Sometimes it was on one side of me, sometimes on the other. Even then
the sense of my dreadful contiguity apparently would come upon her like
a fresh discovery, and she would become hysterical. But I do not think
that she really _saw_ me. She looked at the _riata_ and sniffed it
disparagingly; she pawed some pebbles that were near me tentatively
with her small hoof; she started back with a Robinson-Crusoe-like
horror of my footprints in the wet gully, but my actual personal
presence she ignored. She would sometimes pause, with her head
thoughtfully between her forelegs, and apparently say, "There is some
extraordinary presence here: animal, vegetable, or mineral--I can't
make out which--but it's not good to eat, and I loathe and detest it."

When I reached my house in the suburbs, before entering the "fifty
vara" lot inclosure, I deemed it prudent to leave her outside while I
informed the household of my purchase; and with this object I tethered
her by the long _riata_ to a solitary sycamore which stood in the
centre of the road, the crossing of two frequented thoroughfares. It
was not long, however, before I was interrupted by shouts and screams
from that vicinity and on returning thither I found that Chu Chu, with
the assistance of her _riata_, had securely wound up two of my
neighbors to the tree, where they presented the appearance of early
Christian martyrs. When I released them, it appeared that they had been
attracted by Chu Chu's graces, and had offered her overtures of
affection, to which she had characteristically rotated with this
miserable result.

I led her, with some difficulty, warily keeping clear of the _riata_,
to the inclosure, from whose fence I had previously removed several
bars. Although the space was wide enough to have admitted a troop of
cavalry, she affected not to notice it and managed to kick away part of
another section on entering. She resisted the stable for some time, but
after carefully examining it with her hoofs and an affectedly meek
outstretching of her nose, she consented to recognize some oats in the
feed-box--without looking at them--and was formally installed. All this
while she had resolutely ignored my presence. As I stood watching her,
she suddenly stopped eating; the same reflective look came over her.
"Surely I am not mistaken, but that same obnoxious creature is
somewhere about here!" she seemed to say, and shivered at the
possibility.

It was probably this which made me confide my unreciprocated affection
to one of my neighbors--a man supposed to be an authority on horses,
and particularly of that wild species to which Chu Chu belonged. It was
he who, leaning over the edge of the stall where she was complacently
and, as usual, obliviously munching, absolutely dared to toy with a pet
lock of hair which she wore over the pretty star on her forehead. "Ye
see, captain," he said with jaunty easiness, "hosses is like wimmen; ye
don't want ter use any standoffishness or shyness with _them_; a stiddy
but keerless sort o' familiarity, a kind o' free but firm handlin',
jess like this, to let her see who's master----"

We never clearly knew _how_ it happened; but when I picked up my
neighbor from the doorway, amid the broken splinters of the stall rail
and a quantity of oats that mysteriously filled his hair and pockets,
Chu Chu was found to have faced around the other way and was
contemplating her forelegs, with her hind ones in the other stall. My
neighbor spoke of damages while he was in the stall, and of physical
coercion when he was out of it again. But here Chu Chu, in some
marvelous way, righted herself, and my neighbor departed hurriedly with
a brimless hat and an unfinished sentence.

My next intermediary was Enriquez Saltello--a youth of my age, and the
brother of Consuelo Saltello, whom I adored. As a Spanish Californian
he was presumed, on account of Chu Chu's half-Spanish origin, to have
superior knowledge of her character, and I even vaguely believed that
his language and accent would fall familiarly on her ear. There was the
drawback, however, that he always preferred to talk in a marvelous
English, combining Castilian[145-1] precision with what he fondly
believed to be Californian slang.

"To confer then as to thees horse, which is not--observe me--a Mexican
plug![145-2] Ah, no! you can your boots bet on that. She is of
Castilian stock--believe me and strike me dead! I will myself at
different times overlook and affront her in the stable, examine her as
to the assault, and why she should do thees thing. When she is of the
exercise, I will also accost and restrain her. Remain tranquil, my
friend! When a few days shall pass, much shall be changed, and she will
be as another. Trust your oncle do thees thing! Comprehend me!
Everything shall be lovely, and the goose hang high!"

Conformably with this, he "overlooked" her the next day, with a
cigarette between his yellow-stained finger tips, which made her sneeze
in a silent pantomimic way, and certain blandishments of speech which
she received with more complacency. But I don't think she ever even
looked at him. In vain he protested that she was the "dearest" and
"littlest" of his "little loves"--in vain he asserted that she was his
patron saint, and that it was his soul's delight to pray to her; she
accepted the compliment with her eyes fixed upon the manger. When he
had exhausted his whole stock of endearing diminutives, adding a few
playful and more audacious sallies, she remained with her head down, as
if inclined to meditate upon them. This he declared was at least an
improvement on her former performances. It may have been my own
jealousy, but I fancied she was only saying to herself, "Gracious! can
there be _two_ of them?"

"Courage and patience, my friend," he said, as we were slowly quitting
the stable. "Thees horse is yonge, and has not yet the habitude of the
person. To-morrow, at another season, I shall give to her a foundling"
("fondling," I have reason to believe, was the word intended by
Enriquez)--"and we shall see. It shall be as easy as to fall away from
a log. A leetle more of this chin music which your friend Enriquez
possesses, and some tapping of the head and neck, and you are there.
You are ever the right side up. Houp la! But let us not precipitate
this thing. The more haste, we do not so much accelerate ourselves."

He appeared to be suiting the action to the word as he lingered in the
doorway of the stable. "Come on," I said.

"Pardon," he returned, with a bow that was both elaborate and evasive,
"but you shall yourself precede me--the stable is _yours_."

"Oh, come along!" I continued impatiently. To my surprise, he seemed to
dodge back into the stable again. After an instant he reappeared.

"Pardon! but I am re-strain! Of a truth, in this instant I am grasp by
the mouth of thees horse in the coat-tail of my dress! She will that I
should remain. It would seem"--he disappeared again--"that"--he was out
once more--"the experiment is a sooccess! She reciprocate! She is, of a
truth, gone on me. It is lofe!"--a stronger pull from Chu Chu here sent
him in again--"but"--he was out now triumphantly with half his garment
torn away--"I shall coquet."

Nothing daunted, however, the gallant fellow was back next day with a
Mexican saddle and attired in the complete outfit of a _vaquero_.[147-1]
Overcome though he was by heavy deerskin trousers, open at the side
from the knees down, and fringed with bullion buttons, an enormous flat
_sombrero_,[147-2] and stiff, short embroidered velvet jacket, I was
more concerned at the ponderous saddle and equipments intended for the
slim Chu Chu. That these would hide and conceal her beautiful curves
and contour, as well as overweight her, seemed certain; that she would
resist them all to the last seemed equally clear. Nevertheless, to my
surprise, when she was led out, and the saddle thrown deftly across her
back, she was passive. Was it possible that some drop of her old
Spanish blood responded to its clinging embrace? She did not either
look at it nor smell it. But when Enriquez began to tighten the "cinch"
or girth, a more singular thing occurred. Chu Chu visibly distended her
slender barrel to twice its dimensions; the more he pulled the more she
swelled, until I was actually ashamed of her. Not so Enriquez. He
smiled at us, and complacently stroked his thin moustache.

"Eet is ever so! She is the child of her grandmother! Even when you
shall make saddle thees old Castilian stock, it will make large--it
will become a balloon! Eet is trick--eet is a leetle game--believe me.
For why?"

I had not listened, as I was at that moment astonished to see the
saddle slowly slide under Chu Chu's belly, and her figure resume, as if
by magic, its former slim proportions. Enriquez followed my eyes,
lifted his shoulders, shrugged them, and said smilingly, "Ah, you see!"

When the girths were drawn in again with an extra pull or two from the
indefatigable Enriquez, I fancied that Chu Chu nevertheless secretly
enjoyed it, as her sex is said to appreciate tight-lacing. She drew a
deep sigh, possibly of satisfaction, turned her neck, and apparently
tried to glance at her own figure--Enriquez promptly withdrawing to
enable her to do so easily. Then the dread moment arrived. Enriquez,
with his hand on her mane, suddenly paused and, with exaggerated
courtesy, lifted his hat and made an inviting gesture.

"You will honor me to precede."

I shook my head laughingly.

"I see," responded Enriquez gravely. "You have to attend the obsequies
of your aunt who is dead, at two of the clock. You have to meet your
broker who has bought you feefty share of the Comstock lode[149-1]--at
thees moment--or you are loss! You are excuse! Attend! Gentlemen, make
your bets! The band has arrived to play! 'Ere we are!"

With a quick movement the alert young fellow had vaulted into the
saddle. But, to the astonishment of both of us, the mare remained
perfectly still. There was Enriquez bolt upright in the stirrups,
completely overshadowing by his saddle-flaps, leggings, and gigantic
spurs the fine proportions of Chu Chu, until she might have been a
placid Rosinante,[149-2] bestridden by some youthful Quixote. She
closed her eyes, she was going to sleep! We were dreadfully
disappointed. This clearly would not do. Enriquez lifted the reins
cautiously! Chu Chu moved forward slowly--then stopped, apparently lost
in reflection.

"Affront her on thees side."

I approached her gently. She shot suddenly into the air, coming down
again on perfectly stiff legs with a springless jolt. This she
instantly followed by a succession of other rocket-like propulsions,
utterly unlike a leap, all over the inclosure. The movements of the
unfortunate Enriquez were equally unlike any equitation I ever saw. He
appeared occasionally over Chu Chu's head, astride her neck and tail,
or in the free air, but never in the saddle. His rigid legs, however,
never lost the stirrups, but came down regularly, accentuating her
springless hops. More than that, the disproportionate excess of rider,
saddle, and accoutrements was so great that he had, at times, the
appearance of lifting Chu Chu forcibly from the ground by superior
strength, and of actually contributing to her exercise! As they came
towards me, a wild tossing and flying mass of hoofs and spurs, it was
not only difficult to distinguish them apart, but to ascertain how much
of the jumping was done by Enriquez separately. At last Chu Chu brought
matters to a close by making for the low-stretching branches of an
oak-tree which stood at the corner of the lot. In a few moments she
emerged from it--but without Enriquez.

I found the gallant fellow disengaging himself from the fork of a
branch in which he had been firmly wedged, but still smiling and
confident, and his cigarette between his teeth. Then for the first time
he removed it, and seating himself easily on the branch with his legs
dangling down, he blandly waved aside my anxious queries with a gentle
reassuring gesture.

"Remain tranquil, my friend. Thees does not count! I have conquer--you
observe--for why? I have _never_ for once _arrive at the ground_!
Consequent she is disappoint! She will ever that I _should_! But I
have got her when the hair is not long! Your oncle Henry"--with an
angelic wink--"is fly! He is ever a bully boy, with the eye of glass!
Believe me. Behold! I am here! Big Injun! Whoop!"

He leaped lightly to the ground. Chu Chu, standing watchfully at a
little distance, was evidently astonished at his appearance. She threw
out her hind hoofs violently, shot up into the air until the stirrups
crossed each other high above the saddle, and made for the stable in a
succession of rabbit-like bounds--taking the precaution to remove the
saddle, on entering, by striking it against the lintel of the door.
"You observe," said Enriquez blandly, "she would make that thing of
_me_. Not having the good occasion, she ees dissatisfied. Where
are you now?"

Two or three days afterwards he rode her again with the same
result--accepted by him with the same heroic complacency. As we did
not, for certain reasons, care to use the open road for this exercise
and as it was impossible to remove the tree, we were obliged to submit
to the inevitable. On the following day I mounted her--undergoing the
same experience as Enriquez, with the individual sensation of falling
from a third-story window on top of a counting-house stool, and the
variation of being projected over the fence. When I found that Chu Chu
had not accompanied me, I saw Enriquez at my side. "More than ever it
is become necessary that we should do thees things again," he said
gravely, as he assisted me to my feet. "Courage, my noble General! God
and Liberty! Once more on to the breach! Charge, Chestare, charge! Come
on, Don Stanley! 'Ere we are!"

He helped me none too quickly to catch my seat again, for it apparently
had the effect of the turned peg on the enchanted horse in the Arabian
Nights,[152-1] and Chu Chu instantly rose into the air. But she came
down this time before the open window of the kitchen, and I alighted
easily on the dresser. The indefatigable Enriquez followed me.

"Won't this do?" I asked meekly.

"It ees _better_--for you arrive _not_ on the ground," he said
cheerfully; "but you should not once but a thousand times make trial!
Ha! Go and win! Nevare die and say so! 'Eave ahead! 'Eave! There you
are!"

Luckily, this time I managed to lock the rowels of my long spurs under
her girth, and she could not unseat me. She seemed to recognize the
fact after one or two plunges, when to my great surprise, she suddenly
sank to the ground and quietly rolled over me. The action disengaged my
spurs, but righting herself without getting up, she turned her
beautiful head and absolutely _looked_ at me!--still in the saddle. I
felt myself blushing! But the voice of Enriquez was at my side.

"Errise, my friend; you have conquer! It is _she_ who has arrive at the
ground! _You_ are all right. It is done; believe me, it is feenish! No
more shall she make thees think. From thees instant you shall ride her
as the cow--as the rail of thees fence--and remain tranquil. For she is
a-broke! Ta-ta! Regain your hats, gentlemen! Pass in your checks! It is
ovar! How are you now?" He lit a fresh cigarette, put his hands in his
pockets, and smiled at me blandly.

For all that, I ventured to point out that the habit of alighting in
the fork of a tree, or the disengaging of one's self from the saddle on
the ground, was attended with inconvenience, and even ostentatious
display. But Enriquez swept the objections away with a single gesture.
"It is the _preencipal_--the bottom _fact_--at which you arrive. The
next come of himself! Many horse have achieve to mount the rider by the
knees, and relinquish after thees same fashion. My grandfather had a
barb of thees kind--but she has gone dead, and so have my grandfather.
Which is sad and strange! Otherwise I shall make of them both an
instant example!"

I ought to have said that although these performances were never
actually witnessed by Enriquez's sister--for reasons which he and I
thought sufficient--the dear girl displayed the greatest interest in
them and, perhaps aided by our mutually complimentary accounts of each
other, looked upon us both as invincible heroes. It is possible also
that she over-estimated our success, for she suddenly demanded that I
should _ride_ Chu Chu to her house, that she might see her. It was
not far; by going through a back lane I could avoid the trees which
exercised such a fatal fascination for Chu Chu. There was a pleading,
childlike entreaty in Consuelo's voice that I could not resist, with a
slight flash from her lustrous dark eyes that I did not care to
encourage. So I resolved to try it at all hazards.

My equipment for the performance was modeled after Enriquez's previous
costume, with the addition of a few fripperies of silver and stamped
leather out of compliment to Consuelo, and even with a faint hope that
it might appease Chu Chu. _She_ certainly looked beautiful in her
glittering accoutrements, set off by her jet-black shining coat. With
an air of demure abstraction she permitted me to mount her, and even
for a hundred yards or so indulged in a mincing maidenly amble that was
not without a touch of coquetry. Encouraged by this, I addressed a few
terms of endearment to her, and in the exuberance of my youthful
enthusiasm I even confided to her my love for Consuelo and begged her
to be "good" and not disgrace herself and me before my Dulcinea.[154-1]
In my foolish trustfulness I was rash enough to add a caress and to pat
her soft neck. She stopped instantly with a hysteric shudder. I knew
what was passing through her mind: she had suddenly become aware of my
baleful existence.

The saddle and bridle Chu Chu was becoming accustomed to, but who was
this living, breathing object that had actually touched her? Presently
her oblique vision was attracted by the fluttering movement of a fallen
oak leaf in the road before her. She had probably seen many oak leaves
many times before; her ancestors had no doubt been familiar with them
on the trackless hills and in field and paddock, but this did not alter
her profound conviction that I and the leaf were identical, that our
baleful touch was something indissolubly connected. She reared before
that innocent leaf, she revolved round it, and then fled from it at the
top of her speed.

The lane passed before the rear wall of Saltello's garden.
Unfortunately, at the angle of the fence stood a beautiful
Madrono-tree, brilliant with its scarlet berries, and endeared to me as
Consuelo's favorite haunt, under whose protecting shade I had more than
once avowed my youthful passion. By the irony of fate Chu Chu caught
sight of it, and with a succession of spirited bounds instantly made
for it. In another moment I was beneath it, and Chu Chu shot like a
rocket into the air. I had barely time to withdraw my feet from the
stirrups, to throw up one arm to protect my glazed sombrero and grasp
an over-hanging branch with the other, before Chu Chu darted off. But
to my consternation, as I gained a secure perch on the tree and looked
about me, I saw her--instead of running away--quietly trot through the
open gate into Saltello's garden.

Need I say that it was to the beneficent Enriquez that I again owed my
salvation? Scarcely a moment elapsed before his bland voice rose in a
concentrated whisper from the corner of the garden below me. He had
divined the dreadful truth!

"For the love of God, collect to yourself many kinds of thees berry!
All you can! Your full arms round! Rest tranquil. Leave to your ole
oncle to make for you a delicate exposure. At the instant!"

He was gone again. I gathered, wonderingly, a few of the larger
clusters of parti-colored fruit and patiently waited. Presently he
reappeared, and with him the lovely Consuelo--her dear eyes filled with
an adorable anxiety.

"Yes," continued Enriquez to his sister, with a confidential lowering
of tone but great distinctness of utterance, "it is ever so with the
American! He will ever make _first_ the salutation of the flower or the
fruit, picked to himself by his own hand, to the lady where he call. It
is the custom of the American hidalgo![156-1] My God--what will you?
_I_ make it not--it is so! Without doubt he is in this instant doing
thees thing. That is why we have let go his horse to precede him here;
it is always the etiquette to offer these things on the feet. Ah!
Behold! it is he!--Don Francisco! Even now he will descend from thees
tree! Ah! You make the blush, little sister (archly)! I will retire! I
am discreet; two is not company for the one! I make tracks! I am gone!"

How far Consuelo entirely believed and trusted her ingenious brother I
do not know, nor even then cared to inquire. For there was a pretty
mantling of her olive cheek, as I came forward with my offering, and a
certain significant shyness in her manner that were enough to throw me
into a state of hopeless imbecility. And I was always miserably
conscious that Consuelo possessed an exalted sentimentality, and a
predilection for the highest mediaeval romance, in which I knew I was
lamentably deficient. Even in our most confidential moments I was
always aware that I weakly lagged behind this daughter of a gloomily
distinguished ancestry, in her frequent incursions into a vague but
poetic past. There was something of the dignity of the Spanish
_chatelaine_[157-1] in the sweetly grave little figure that advanced to
accept my specious offering. I think I should have fallen on my knees
to present it, but for the presence of the all seeing Enriquez. But why
did I even at that moment remember that he had early bestowed upon her
the nickname of "Pomposa"? This, as Enriquez himself might have
observed, was "sad and strange."

I managed to stammer out something about the Madrono berries being at
her "disposition" (the tree was in her own garden!), and she took the
branches in her little brown hand with a soft response to my
unutterable glances.

But here Chu Chu, momentarily forgotten, executed a happy diversion. To
our astonishment she gravely walked up to Consuelo and, stretching out
her long slim neck, not only sniffed curiously at the berries, but even
protruded a black underlip towards the young girl herself. In another
instant Consuelo's dignity melted. Throwing her arms around Chu Chu's
neck she embraced and kissed her. Young as I was, I understood the
divine significance of a girl's vicarious effusiveness at such a
moment, and felt delighted. But I was the more astonished that the
usually sensitive horse not only submitted to these caresses, but
actually responded to the extent of affecting to nip my mistress's
little right ear.

This was enough for the impulsive Consuelo. She ran hastily into the
house and in a few moments reappeared in a bewitching riding-shirt. In
vain Enriquez and myself joined in earnest entreaty: the horse was
hardly broken for even a man's riding yet; the saints alone could tell
what the nervous creature might do with a woman's skirt flipping at her
side! We begged for delay, for reflection, for at least time to change
the saddle--but with no avail! Consuelo was determined, indignant,
distressingly reproachful! Ah, well! if Don Pancho (an ingenious
diminutive of my Christian name) valued his horse so highly--if he were
jealous of the evident devotion of the animal to herself, he would--but
here I succumbed! And then I had the felicity of holding that little
foot for one brief moment in the hollow of my hand, of readjusting the
skirt as she threw her knee over the saddle-horn, of clasping her
tightly--only half in fear--as I surrendered the reins to her grasp.
And to tell the truth, as Enriquez and I fell back, although I had
insisted upon still keeping hold of the end of the _riata_, it was a
picture to admire. The _petite_[158-1] figure of the young girl and the
graceful folds of her skirt admirably harmonized with Chu Chu's lithe
contour, and as the mare arched her slim neck and raised her slender
head under the pressure of the reins, it was so like the lifted
velvet-capped toreador[159-1] crest of Consuelo herself, that they
seemed of one race.

"I would not that you should hold the _riata_," said Consuelo
petulantly.

I hesitated--Chu Chu looked certainly very amiable--I let go. She began
to amble towards the gate, not mincingly as before, but with a freer
and fuller stride. In spite of the incongruous saddle, the young girl's
seat was admirable. As they neared the gate, she cast a single
mischievous glance at me, jerked at the rein, and Chu Chu sprang into
the road at a rapid canter. I watched them fearfully and breathlessly,
until at the end of the lane I saw Consuelo rein in slightly, wheel
easily, and come flying back. There was no doubt about it; the horse
was under perfect control. Her second subjugation was complete and
final!

Overjoyed and bewildered, I overwhelmed them with congratulations;
Enriquez alone retaining the usual brotherly attitude of criticism and
a superior toleration of a lover's enthusiasm. I ventured to hint to
Consuelo (in what I believed was a safe whisper) that Chu Chu only
showed my own feelings towards her. "Without doubt," responded Enriquez
gravely. "She have of herself assist you to climb to the tree to pull
to yourself the berry for my sister." But I felt Consuelo's little hand
return my pressure, and I forgave and even pitied him.

From that day forward, Chu Chu and Consuelo were not only firm friends
but daily companions. In my devotion I would have presented the horse
to the young girl, but with flattering delicacy she preferred to call
it mine. "I shall erride it for you, Pancho," she said; "I shall feel,"
she continued with exalted although somewhat vague poetry, "That it is
of you! You lofe the beast--it is therefore of a necessity _you_, my
Pancho! It is _your_ soul I shall erride like the wings of the
wind--your lofe in this beast shall be my only cavalier for ever." I
would have preferred something whose vicarious qualities were less
uncertain than I still felt Chu Chu's to be, but I kissed the girl's
hand submissively.

It was only when I attempted to accompany her in the flesh, on another
horse, that I felt the full truth of my instinctive fears. Chu Chu
would not permit any one to approach her mistress's side. My mounted
presence revived in her all her old blind astonishment and disbelief in
my existence; she would start suddenly, face about, and back away from
me in utter amazement as if I had been only recently created, or with
an affected modesty as if I had been just guilty of some grave
indecorum towards her sex which she really could not stand. The
frequency of these exhibitions in the public highway were not only
distressing to me as a simple escort, but as it had the effect on the
casual spectators of making Consuelo seem to participate in Chu Chu's
objections, I felt that, as a lover, it could not be borne. An attempt
to coerce Chu Chu ended in her running away. And my frantic pursuit of
her was open to equal misconstruction. "Go it, Miss, the little dude is
gainin' on you!" shouted by a drunken teamster to the frightened
Consuelo, once checked me in mid-career. Even the dear girl herself saw
the uselessness of my real presence, and after a while was content to
ride with "my soul."

Notwithstanding this, I am not ashamed to say that it was my custom,
whenever she rode out, to keep a slinking and distant surveillance of
Chu Chu on another horse, until she had fairly settled down to her
pace. A little nod of Consuelo's round black-and-red toreador hat or a
kiss tossed from her riding-whip was reward enough!

I remember a pleasant afternoon when I was thus awaiting her in the
village. The eternal smile of the Californian summer had begun to waver
and grow less fixed; dust lay thick on leaf and blade; the dry hills
were clothed in russet leather; the trade winds were shifting to the
south with an ominous warm humidity; a few days longer and the rains
would be here. It so chanced that this afternoon my seclusion on the
roadside was accidentally invaded by a village belle--a Western young
lady somewhat older than myself, and of flirtatious reputation. As she
persistently and--as I now have reason to believe--mischievously
lingered, I had only a passing glimpse of Consuelo riding past at an
unaccustomed speed which surprised me at the moment. But as I reasoned
later that she was only trying to avoid a merely formal meeting, I
thought no more about it.

It was not until I called at the house to fetch Chu Chu at the usual
hour, and found that Consuelo had not yet returned, that a recollection
of Chu Chu's furious pace again troubled me. An hour passed--it was
getting towards sunset, but there were no signs of Chu Chu nor her
mistress. I became seriously alarmed. I did not care to reveal my fears
to the family, for I felt myself responsible for Chu Chu. At last I
desperately saddled my horse and galloped off in the direction she had
taken. It was the road to Rosario and the _hacienda_[162-1] of one of
her relations, where she sometimes halted.

The road was a very unfrequented one, twisting like a mountain
river--indeed, it was the bed of an old watercourse--between brown
hills of wild oats, and debouching at last into a broad blue lake-like
expanse of alfalfa[162-2] meadows. In vain I strained my eyes over the
monotonous level; nothing appeared to rise above or move across it. In
the faint hope that she might have lingered at the _hacienda_, I was
spurring on again when I heard a slight splashing on my left. I looked
around. A broad patch of fresher-colored herbage and a cluster of
dwarfed alders indicated a hidden spring. I cautiously approached its
quaggy edges, when I was shocked by what appeared to be a sudden
vision! Mid-leg deep in the center of a greenish pool stood Chu Chu!
But without a strap or buckle of harness upon her--as naked as when she
was foaled!

For a moment I could only stare at her in bewildered terror. Far from
recognizing me, she seemed to be absorbed in a nymph-like contemplation
of her own graces in the pool. Then I called "Consuelo!" and galloped
frantically around the spring. But there was no response, nor was there
anything to be seen but the all-unconscious Chu Chu. The pool, thank
Heaven! was not deep enough to have drowned any one; there were no
signs of a struggle on its quaggy edges. The horse might have come from
a distance! I galloped on, still calling. A few hundred yards further I
detected the vivid glow of Chu Chu's scarlet saddle-blanket in the
brush near the trail. My heart leaped--I was on the track. I called
again; this time a faint reply, in accents I knew too well, came from
the field beside me!

Consuelo was there! reclining beside a manzanita bush which screened
her from the road, in what struck me, even at that supreme moment, as a
judicious and picturesquely selected couch of scented Indian grass and
dry tussocks. The velvet hat with its balls of scarlet plush was laid
carefully aside; her lovely blue-black hair retained its tight coils
undisheveled, her eyes were luminous and tender. Shocked as I was at
her apparent helplessness, I remember being impressed with the fact
that it gave so little indication of violent usage or disaster.

I threw myself frantically on the ground beside her.

"You are hurt, Consita! For Heaven's sake, what has happened?"

She pushed my hat back with her little hand, and tumbled my hair
gently.

"Nothing. _You_ are here, Pancho--eet is enofe! What shall come after
thees--when I am perhaps gone among the grave--make nothing! _You_ are
here--I am happy. For a little, perhaps--not mooch."

"But," I went on desperately, "was it an accident? Were you thrown? Was
it Chu Chu?"--for somehow, in spite of her languid posture and voice, I
could not, even in my fears, believe her seriously hurt.

"Beat not the poor beast, Pancho. It is not from _her_ comes thees
thing. She have make nothing--believe me! I have come upon your
assignation with Miss Essmith! I make but to pass you--to fly--to never
come back! I have say to Chu Chu, 'Fly!' We fly many miles. Sometimes
together, sometimes not so mooch! Sometimes in the saddle, sometimes on
the neck! Many things remain in the road; at the end, I myself remain!
I have say, 'Courage, Pancho will come!' Then I say, 'No, he is talk
with Miss Essmith!' I remember not more. I have creep here on the
hands. Eet is feenish!"

I looked at her distractedly. She smiled tenderly and slightly smoothed
down and rearranged a fold of her dress to cover her delicate little
boot.

"But," I protested, "you are not much hurt, dearest. You have broken no
bones. Perhaps," I added, looking at the boot, "only a slight sprain.
Let me carry you to my horse; I will walk beside you, home. Do, dearest
Consita!"

She turned her lovely eyes towards me sadly. "You comprehend not, my
poor Pancho! It is not of the foot, the ankle, the arm, or the head
that I can say, 'She is broke.' I would it were even so. But"--she
lifted her sweet lashes slowly--"I have derrange my inside. It is an
affair of my family. My grandfather have once toomble over the bull at
a _rodeo_.[165-1] He speak no more; he is dead. For why? He has
derrange his inside. Believe me, it is of the family. You comprehend?
The Saltellos are not as the other peoples for this. When I am gone,
you will bring to me the berry to grow upon my tomb, Pancho; the berry
you have picked for me. The little flower will come too, the little
star will arrive, but Consuelo, who lofe you, she will come not more!

"When you are happy and talk in the road to the Essmith, you will not
think of me. You will not see my eyes, Pancho; thees little grass"--she
ran her plump little fingers through a tussock--"will hide them; and
the small animals in the black coats that lif here will have much
sorrow--but you will not. It ees better so! My father will not that I,
a Catholique, should marry into a camp-meeting and lif in a tent." (It
was one of Consuelo's bewildering beliefs that there was only one form
of dissent--Methodism!) "He will not that I should marry a man who
possess not the many horses, ox, and cow, like him. But _I_ care not.
_You_ are my only religion, Pancho! I have enofe of the horse, and ox,
and cow when _you_ are with me! Kiss me, Pancho. Perhaps it is for the
last time--the feenish! Who knows?"

There were tears in her lovely eyes; I felt that my own were growing
dim; the sun was sinking over the dreary plain to the slow rising of
the wind; and infinite loneliness had fallen upon us, and yet I was
miserably conscious of some dreadful unreality in it all. A desire to
laugh, which I felt must be hysterical, was creeping over me; I dared
not speak. But her dear head was on my shoulder, and the situation was
not unpleasant.

Nevertheless, something must be done! This was the more difficult as it
was by no means clear what had already been done. Even while I
supported her drooping figure, I was straining my eyes across her
shoulder for succor of some kind. Suddenly the figure of a rapid rider
appeared upon the road. It seemed familiar. I looked again--it was the
blessed Enriquez! A sense of deep relief came over me. I loved
Consuelo; but never before had lover ever hailed the irruption of one
of his beloved's family with such complacency.

"You are safe, dearest; it is Enriquez!"

I thought she received the information coldly. Suddenly she turned upon
me her eyes, now bright and glittering. "Swear to me at the instant,
Pancho, that you will not again look upon Miss Essmith, even for once."

I was simple and literal. Miss Smith was my nearest neighbor, and
unless I was stricken with blindness, compliance was impossible. I
hesitated--but swore.

"Enofe--you have hesitate--I will no more."

She rose to her feet with grave deliberation. For an instant, with the
recollection of the delicate internal organization of the Saltellos on
my mind, I was in agony lest she should totter and fall, even then,
yielding up her gentle spirit on the spot. But when I looked again, she
had a hairpin between her white teeth and was carefully adjusting her
toreador hat. And beside us was Enriquez--cheerful, alert, voluble, and
undaunted.

"Eureka! I have found! We are all here! Eet is a leetle public--eh! A
leetle too much of a front seat for a _tete-a-tete_,[167-1] my yonge
friends," he said, glancing at the remains of Consuelo's bower, "but
for the accounting of taste there is none. What will you? The meat of
the one man shall envenom the meat of the other. But" (in a whisper to
me) "as to thees horse--thees Chu Chu, which I have just pass--why is
she undress? Surely you would no make an exposition of her to the
traveler to suspect! And if not, why so?"

I tried to explain, looking at Consuelo, that Chu Chu had run away,
that Consuelo had met with a terrible accident, had been thrown, and I
feared had suffered serious internal injury. But to my embarrassment
Consuelo maintained a half scornful silence, and an inconsistent
freshness of healthful indifference, as Enriquez approached her with an
engaging smile. "Ah, yes, she have the headache, and the molligrubs.
She will sit on the damp stone when the gentle dew is falling. I
comprehend. Meet me in the lane when the clock strike nine! But," in a
lower voice, "of thees undress horse I comprehend nothing! Look you--it
is sad and strange."

He went off to fetch Chu Chu, leaving me and Consuelo alone. I do not
think I ever felt so utterly abject and bewildered before in my life.
Without knowing why, I was miserably conscious of having in some way
offended the girl for whom I believed I would have given my life, and I
had made her and myself ridiculous in the eyes of her brother. I had
again failed in my slower Western nature to understand her high
romantic Spanish soul! Meantime she was smoothing out her riding habit,
and looking as fresh and pretty as when she first left her house.

"Consita," I said hesitatingly, "you are not angry with me?"

"Angry?" she repeated haughtily, without looking at me. "Oh, no! Of a
possibility eet is Mees Essmith who is angry that I have interroopt her
tete-a-tete with you, and have send here my brother to make the same
with me."

"But," I said eagerly, "Miss Smith does not even know Enriquez!"

Consuelo turned on me a glance of unutterable significance. "Ah!" she
said darkly, "you _tink_!"

Indeed I _knew_. But here I believed I understood Consuelo and was
relieved. I even ventured to say gently, "And you are better?"

She drew herself up to her full height, which was not much. "Of my
health, what is it? A nothing. Yes! Of my soul let us not speak."

Nevertheless, when Enriquez appeared with Chu Chu she ran towards her
with outstretched arms. Chu Chu protruded about six inches of upper lip
in response--apparently under the impression, which I could quite
understand, that her mistress was edible. And, I may have been
mistaken, but their beautiful eyes met in an absolute and distinct
glance of intelligence!

During the home journey Consuelo recovered her spirits and parted from
me with a magnanimous and forgiving pressure of the hand. I do not know
what explanation of Chu Chu's original escapade was given to Enriquez
and the rest of the family; the inscrutable forgiveness extended to me
by Consuelo precluded any further inquiry on my part. I was willing to
leave it a secret between her and Chu Chu. But strange to say, it
seemed to complete our own understanding, and precipitated, not only
our love-making, but the final catastrophe which culminated that
romance. For we had resolved to elope. I do not know that this heroic
remedy was absolutely necessary from the attitude of either Consuelo's
family or my own; I am inclined to think we preferred it because it
involved no previous explanation or advice.

Need I say that our confidant and firm ally was Consuelo's brother--the
alert, the linguistic, the ever-happy, ever-ready Enriquez? It was
understood that his presence would not only give a certain mature
respectability to our performance--but I do not think we would have
contemplated this step without it. During one of our riding excursions
we were to secure the services of a Methodist minister in the adjoining
county, and later that of the Mission _padre_[169-1]--when the secret
was out. "I will gif her away," said Enriquez confidently, "it will on
the instant propitiate the old fellow who shall perform the affair and
withhold his jaw. A little chin-music from your oncle 'Arry shall
finish it! Remain tranquil and forget not a ring! One does not always,
in the agony and dissatisfaction of the moment, a ring remember. I
shall bring two in the pocket of my dress."

If I did not entirely participate in this roseate view, it may have
been because Enriquez, although a few years my senior, was much
younger-looking, and with his demure deviltry of eye and his upper lip
close shaven for this occasion, he suggested a depraved acolyte rather
than a responsible member of a family. Consuelo had also confided to me
that her father--possibly owing to some rumors of our previous
escapade--had forbidden any further excursions with me alone. The
innocent man did not know that Chu Chu had forbidden it also, and that
even on this momentous occasion both Enriquez and myself were obliged
to ride in opposite fields like out-flankers. But we nevertheless felt
the full guilt of disobedience added to our desperate enterprise.
Meanwhile, although pressed for time and subject to discovery at any
moment, I managed at certain points of the road to dismount and walk
beside Chu Chu (who did not seem to recognize me on foot), holding
Consuelo's hand in my own, with the discreet Enriquez leading my horse
in the distant field. I retain a very vivid picture of that walk--the
ascent of a gentle slope towards a prospect as yet unknown but full of
glorious possibilities; the tender dropping light of an autumn sky,
slightly filmed with the promise of the future rains, like foreshadowed
tears, and the half-frightened, half-serious talk into which Consuelo
and I had insensibly fallen.

And then, I don't know how it happened, but as we reached the summit
Chu Chu suddenly reared, wheeled, and the next moment was flying back
along the road we had just traveled, at the top of her speed! It might
have been that, after her abstracted fashion, she only at that moment
detected my presence; but so sudden and complete was her evolution that
before I could regain my horse from the astonished Enriquez she was
already a quarter of a mile on the homeward stretch, with the frantic
Consuelo pulling hopelessly at the bridle.

We started in pursuit. But a horrible despair seized us. To attempt to
overtake her, even to follow at the same rate of speed would only
excite Chu Chu and endanger Consuelo's life. There was absolutely no
help for it, nothing could be done; the mare had taken her determined,
long, continuous stride, the road was a straight, steady descent all
the way back to the village, Chu Chu had the bit between her teeth, and
there was no prospect of swerving her. We could only follow hopelessly,
idiotically, furiously, until Chu Chu dashed triumphantly into the
Saltellos' courtyard, carrying the half-fainting Consuelo back to the
arms of her assembled and astonished family.

It was our last ride together. It was the last I ever saw of Consuelo
before her transfer to the safe seclusion of a convent in Southern
California. It was the last I ever saw of Chu Chu, who in the confusion
of that _rencontre_[172-1] was overlooked in her half-loosed harness
and allowed to escape through the back gate to the fields. Months
afterwards it was said that she had been identified among a band of
wild horses in the Coast Range, as a strange and beautiful creature who
had escaped the brand of the _rodeo_ and had become a myth. There was
another legend that she had been seen, sleek, fat, and gorgeously
caparisoned, issuing from the gateway of the Rosario _patio_,[172-2]
before a lumbering Spanish _cabriole_[172-3] in which a short, stout
matron was seated--but I will have none of it. For there are days when
she still lives, and I can see her plainly still climbing the gentle
slope towards the summit, with Consuelo on her back and myself at her
side, pressing eagerly forward towards the illimitable prospect that
opens in the distance.




NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE

Feathertop

A MORALIZED LEGEND


"Dickon," cried Mother Rigby, "a coal for my pipe!"

The pipe was in the old dame's mouth when she said these words. She had
thrust it there after filling it with tobacco but without stooping to
light it at the hearth where, indeed, there was no appearance of a fire
having been kindled that morning. Forthwith, however, as soon as the
order was given, there was an intense red glow out of the bowl of the
pipe and a whiff of smoke from Mother Rigby's lips. Whence the coal
came and how brought hither by an invisible hand, I have never been
able to discover.

"Good!" quoth Mother Rigby, with a nod of her head. "Thank ye, Dickon!
And now for making this scarecrow. Be within call, Dickon, in case I
need you again."

The good woman had risen thus early (for as yet it was scarcely
sunrise) in order to set about making a scarecrow, which she intended
to put in the middle of her corn-patch. It was now the latter week of
May, and the crows and blackbirds had already discovered the little
green, rolled-up leaf of the Indian corn just peeping out of the soil.
She was determined, therefore, to contrive as lifelike a scarecrow as
ever was seen, and to finish it immediately from top to toe, so that it
should begin its sentinel's duty that very morning. Now Mother Rigby
(as everybody must have heard) was one of the most cunning and potent
witches in New England, and might with very little trouble have made a
scarecrow ugly enough to frighten the minister himself. But on this
occasion, as she had awakened in an uncommonly pleasant humor, and was
further dulcified by her pipe of tobacco, she resolved to produce
something fine, beautiful, and splendid rather than hideous and
horrible.

"I don't want to set up a hobgoblin in my own corn-patch, and almost at
my own doorstep," said Mother Rigby to herself, puffing out a whiff of
smoke. "I could do it if I pleased, but I'm tired of doing marvelous
things, and so I'll keep within the bounds of everyday business just
for variety's sake. Besides, there is no use in scaring the little
children for a mile roundabout, though 'tis true I'm a witch." It was
settled, therefore, in her own mind that the scarecrow should represent
a fine gentleman of the period so far as the materials at hand would
allow.

Perhaps it may be as well to enumerate the chief of the articles that
went to the composition of this figure. The most important item of all,
probably, although it made so little show, was a certain broomstick on
which Mother Rigby had taken many an airy gallop at mid-night, and
which now served the scarecrow by way of a spinal column or, as the
unlearned phrase it, a backbone. One of its arms was a disabled flail
which used to be wielded by Goodman Rigby before his spouse worried him
out of this troublesome world; the other, if I mistake not, was
composed of the pudding-stick and a broken rung of a chair, tied
loosely together at the elbow. As for its legs, the right was a
hoe-handle, and the left an undistinguished and miscellaneous stick
from the wood-pile. Its lungs, stomach, and other affairs of that kind,
were nothing better than a meal-bag stuffed with straw. Thus we have
made out the skeleton and entire corporosity of the scarecrow, with the
exception of its head, and this was admirably supplied by a somewhat
withered and shriveled pumpkin, in which Mother Rigby cut two holes for
the eyes and a slit for the mouth, leaving a bluish-colored knob in the
middle to pass for a nose. It was really quite a respectable face.

"I've seen worse ones on human shoulders, at any rate," said Mother
Rigby. "And many a fine gentleman has a pumpkin head, as well as my
scarecrow."

But the clothes in this case were to be the making of the man; so the
good old woman took down from a peg an ancient plum-colored coat of
London make and with relics of embroidery on its seams, cuffs,
pocket-flaps, and buttonholes, but lamentably worn and faded, patched
at the elbows, tattered at the skirts, and threadbare all over. On the
left breast was a round hole whence either a star of nobility had been
rent away or else the hot heart of some former wearer had scorched it
through and through. The neighbors said that this rich garment belonged
to the Black Man's wardrobe, and that he kept it at Mother Rigby's
cottage for the convenience of slipping it on whenever he wished to
make a grand appearance at the governor's table. To match the coat
there was a velvet waist-coat of very ample size, and formerly
embroidered with foliage that had been as brightly golden as the
maple-leaves in October, but which had now quite vanished out of the
substance of the velvet. Next came a pair of scarlet breeches once worn
by the French governor of Louisbourg, and the knees of which had
touched the lower step of the throne of Louis le Grand.[176-1] The
Frenchman had given these small-clothes to an Indian pow-wow, who
parted with them to the old witch for a gill of strong waters at one of
their dances in the forest. Furthermore, Mother Rigby produced a pair
of silk stockings and put them on the figure's legs, where they showed
as unsubstantial as a dream, with the wooden reality of the two sticks
making itself miserably apparent through the holes. Lastly, she put her
dead husband's wig on the bare scalp of the pumpkin, and surmounted the
whole with a dusty three-cornered hat, in which was stuck the longest
tail-feather of a rooster.

Then the old dame stood the figure up in a corner of her cottage and
chuckled to behold its yellow semblance of a visage, with its nobby
little nose thrust into the air. It had a strangely self-satisfied
aspect, and seemed to say, "Come, look at me!"

"And you are well worth looking at, that's a fact!" quoth Mother Rigby,
in admiration at her own handiwork. "I've made many a puppet since I've
been a witch but methinks this the finest of them all. 'Tis almost too
good for a scarecrow. And, by the by, I'll just fill a fresh pipe of
tobacco, and then take him out to the corn-patch."

While filling her pipe the old woman continued to gaze with almost
motherly affection at the figure in the corner. To say the truth,
whether it were chance or skill or downright witchcraft, there was
something wonderfully human in this ridiculous shape bedizened with its
tattered finery, and, as for the countenance, it appeared to shrivel
its yellow surface into a grin--a funny kind of expression betwixt
scorn and merriment, as if it understood itself to be a jest at
mankind. The more Mother Rigby looked, the better she was pleased.

"Dickon," cried she, sharply, "another coal for my pipe!"

Hardly had she spoken than, just as before, there was a red-glowing
coal on the top of the tobacco. She drew in a long whiff, and puffed it
forth again into the bar of morning sunshine which struggled through
the one dusty pane of her cottage window. Mother Rigby always liked to
flavor her pipe with a coal of fire from the particular chimney-corner
whence this had been brought. But where that chimney-corner might be or
who brought the coal from it--further than that the invisible messenger
seemed to respond to the name of Dickon--I cannot tell.

"That puppet yonder," thought Mother Rigby, still with her eyes fixed
on the scarecrow, "is too good a piece of work to stand all summer in a
corn-patch frightening away the crows and blackbirds. He's capable of
better things. Why, I've danced with a worse one when partners happened
to be scarce at our witch-meetings in the forests! What if I should let
him take his chance among the other men of straw and empty fellows who
go bustling about the world?"

The old witch took three or four more whiffs of her pipe and smiled.

"He'll meet plenty of his brethren at every street-corner," continued
she. "Well, I didn't mean to dabble in witchcraft to-day further than
the lighting of my pipe, but a witch I am and a witch I'm likely to be
and there's no use trying to shirk it. I'll make a man of my scarecrow,
were it only for the joke's sake."

While muttering these words Mother Rigby took the pipe from her own
mouth and thrust it into the crevice which represented the same feature
in the pumpkin-visage of the scarecrow.

"Puff, darling, puff!" she said. "Puff away, my fine fellow! Your life
depends on it!"

This was a strange exhortation, undoubtedly, to be addressed to a mere
thing of sticks, straw, and old clothes, with nothing better than a
shriveled pumpkin for a head, as we know to have been the scarecrow's
case. Nevertheless, as we must carefully hold in remembrance, Mother
Rigby was a witch of singular power and dexterity; and, keeping this
fact duly before our minds, we shall see nothing beyond credibility in
the remarkable incidents of our story. Indeed, the great difficulty
will be at once got over if we can only bring ourselves to believe that
as soon as the old dame bade him puff there came a whiff of smoke from
the scarecrow's mouth. It was the very feeblest of whiffs, to be sure,
but it was followed by another and another, each more decided than the
preceding one.

"Puff away, my pet! Puff away, my pretty one!" Mother Rigby kept
repeating, with her pleasantest smile. "It is the breath of life to ye
and that you may take my word for."

Beyond all question, the pipe was bewitched. There must have been a
spell either in the tobacco or in the fiercely glowing coal that so
mysteriously burned on top of it, or in the pungently aromatic smoke
which exhaled from the kindled weed. The figure, after a few doubtful
attempts, at length blew forth a volley of smoke extending all the way
from the obscure corner into the bar of sunshine. There it eddied and
melted away among the motes of dust. It seemed a convulsive effort, for
the two or three next whiffs were fainter, although the coal still
glowed and threw a gleam over the scarecrow's visage. The old witch
clapped her skinny hands together, and smiled encouragingly upon her
handiwork. She saw that the charm had worked well. The shriveled yellow
face, which heretofore had been no face at all, had already a thin
fantastic haze, as it were, of human likeness shifting to and fro
across it, sometimes vanishing entirely, but growing more perceptible
than ever with the next whiff from the pipe. The whole figure, in like
manner, assumed a show of life such as we impart to ill-defined shapes
among the clouds and half deceive ourselves with the pastime of our own
fancy.

If we must needs pry closely into the matter, it may be doubted whether
there was any real change, after all, in the sordid, worn-out,
worthless and ill-jointed substance of the scarecrow, but merely a
spectral illusion and a cunning effect of light and shade, so colored
and contrived as to delude the eyes of most men. The miracles of
witchcraft seem always to have had a very shallow subtlety and at
least, if the above explanations do not hit the truth of the process, I
can suggest no better.

"Well puffed, my pretty lad!" still cried old Mother Rigby. "Come!
another good, stout whiff, and let it be with might and main. Puff for
thy life, I tell thee! Puff out of the very bottom of thy heart, if any
heart thou hast, or any bottom to it. Well done, again! Thou didst suck
in that mouthful as if for the pure love of it."

And then the witch beckoned to the scarecrow, throwing so much magnetic
potency into her gesture that it seemed as if it must inevitably be
obeyed, like the mystic call of the lodestone when it summons the iron.

"Why lurkest thou in the corner, lazy one?" said she. "Step forth! Thou
hast the world before thee!"

Upon my word, if the legend were not one which I heard on my
grandmother's knee, and which had established its place among things
credible before my childish judgment could analyze its probability, I
question whether I should have the face to tell it now.

In obedience to Mother Rigby's word and extending its arm as if to
reach her outstretched hand, the figure made a step forward--a kind of
hitch and jerk, however, rather than a step--then tottered and almost
lost its balance. What could the witch expect? It was nothing, after
all, but a scarecrow stuck upon two sticks. But the strong-willed old
Beldam scowled and beckoned and flung the energy of her purpose so
forcibly at this poor combination of rotten wood and musty straw and
ragged garments that it was compelled to show itself a man, in spite of
the reality of things; so it stepped into the bar of sunshine. There it
stood, poor devil of a contrivance that it was, with only the thinnest
vesture of human similitude about it, through which was evident the
stiff, rickety, incongruous, faded, tattered, good-for-nothing
patchwork of its substance, ready to sink in a heap upon the floor, as
conscious of its own unworthiness to be erect. Shall I confess the
truth? At its present point of vivification the scarecrow reminds me of
some of the lukewarm and abortive characters composed of heterogeneous
materials used for the thousandth time, and never worth using, with
which romance writers (and myself, no doubt, among the rest) have so
overpeopled the world of fiction.

But the fierce old hag began to get angry and show a glimpse of her
diabolic nature, like a snake's head peeping with a hiss out of her
bosom, at this pusillanimous behavior of the thing which she had taken
the trouble to put together.

"Puff away, wretch!" cried she, wrathfully. "Puff puff, puff, thou
thing of straw and emptiness! thou rag or two! thou meal-bag! thou
pumpkin-head! thou nothing! Where shall I find a name vile enough to
call thee by? Puff, I say, and suck in thy fantastic life along with
the smoke, else I snatch the pipe from thy mouth and hurl thee where
that red coal came from."

Thus threatened, the unhappy scarecrow had nothing for it but to puff
away for dear life. As need was, therefore, it applied itself lustily
to the pipe, and sent forth such abundant volleys of tobacco-smoke that
the small cottage-kitchen became all-vaporous. The one sunbeam
struggled mistily through, and could but imperfectly define the image
of the cracked and dusty window-pane on the opposite wall.

Mother Rigby, meanwhile, with one brown arm akimbo and the other
stretched toward the figure, loomed grimly amid the obscurity with such
port and expression as when she was wont to heave a ponderous nightmare
on her victims and stand at the bedside to enjoy their agony.

In fear and trembling did this poor scarecrow puff. But its efforts, it
must be acknowledged, served an excellent purpose, for with each
successive whiff the figure lost more and more of its dizzy and
perplexing tenuity and seemed to take denser substance. Its very
garments, moreover, partook of the magical change, and shone with the
gloss of novelty, and glistened with the skilfully embroidered gold
that had long ago been rent away, and, half revealed among the smoke, a
yellow visage bent its lustreless eyes on Mother Rigby.

At last the old witch clenched her fist and shook it at the figure. Not
that she was positively angry but merely acting on the principle--perhaps
untrue or not the only truth, though as high a one as Mother Rigby
could be expected to attain--that feeble and torpid natures, being
incapable of better inspiration, must be stirred up by fear. But here
was the crisis. Should she fail in what she now sought to affect, it
was her ruthless purpose to scatter the miserable simulacre into its
original elements.

"Thou hast a man's aspect," said she, sternly, "have also the echo and
mockery of a voice. I bid thee speak!"

The scarecrow gasped, struggled, and at length emitted a murmur which
was so incorporated with its smoky breath that you could scarcely tell
whether it were indeed a voice or only a whiff of tobacco. Some
narrators of this legend held the opinion that Mother Rigby's
conjurations and the fierceness of her will had compelled a familiar
spirit into the figure, and that the voice was his.

"Mother," mumbled the poor stifled voice, "be not so awful with me! I
would fain speak, but, being without wits, what can I say?"

"Thou canst speak, darling, canst thou?" cried Mother Rigby, relaxing
her grim countenance into a smile. "And what shalt thou say, quotha?
Say, indeed! Art thou of the brotherhood of the empty skull and
demandest of me what thou shalt say? Thou shalt say a thousand things,
and saying them a thousand times over, thou shalt still have said
nothing. Be not afraid, I tell thee! When thou comest into the
world--whither I purpose sending thee forthwith--thou shalt not lack
the wherewithal to talk. Talk. Why, thou shalt babble like a
mill-stream, if thou wilt. Thou hast brains enough for that, I trow."

"At your service, mother," responded the figure.

"And that was well said, my pretty one!" answered Mother Rigby. "Then
thou spakest like thyself and meant nothing. Thou shalt have a hundred
such set phrases and five hundred to the boot of them. And now,
darling, I have taken so much pains with thee and thou art so beautiful
that, by my troth, I love thee better than any witch's puppet in the
world; and I've made them of all sorts--clay, wax, straw, sticks, night
fog, morning mist, sea-foam, and chimney-smoke. But thou art the very
best; so give heed to what I say."

"Yes, kind mother," said the figure, "with all my heart!"

"With all thy heart!" cried the old witch, setting her hands to her
sides, and laughing loudly. "Thou hast such a pretty way of speaking!
With all thy heart! And thou didst put thy hand to the left side of thy
waistcoat, as if thou really hadst one!"

So now in high good-humor with this fantastic contrivance of hers,
Mother Rigby told the scarecrow that it must go and play its part in
the great world, where not one man in a hundred, she affirmed, was
gifted with more real substance than itself. And that he might hold up
his head with the best of them, she endowed him on the spot with an
unreckonable amount of wealth. It consisted partly of a gold-mine in
Eldorado,[185-1] and of ten thousand shares in a broken bubble, and of
half a million acres of vineyard at the North Pole, and of a castle in
the air and a chateau in Spain, together with all the rents and income
therefrom accruing. She further made over to him the cargo of a certain
ship laden with salt of Cadiz which she herself by her necromantic arts
had caused to founder ten years before in the deepest part of
mid-ocean. If the salt were not dissolved and could be brought to
market, it would fetch a pretty penny among the fishermen. That he
might not lack ready money, she gave him a copper farthing of
Birmingham manufacture, being all the coin she had about her, and
likewise a great deal of brass, which she applied to his forehead, thus
making it yellower than ever.

"With that brass alone," quoth Mother Rigby, "thou canst pay thy way
all over the earth. Kiss me, pretty darling! I have done my best for
thee."

Furthermore, that the adventurer might lack no possible advantage
toward a fair start in life, this excellent old dame gave him a token
by which he was to introduce himself to a certain magistrate, member of
the council, merchant, and elder of the church (the four capacities
constituting but one man) who stood at the head of society in the
neighboring metropolis. The token was neither more nor less than a
single word, which Mother Rigby whispered to the scarecrow and which
the scarecrow was to whisper to the merchant.

"Gouty as the old fellow is, he'll run thy errands for thee when once
thou hast given him that word in his ear," said the old witch. "Mother
Rigby knows the worshipful justice Gookin, and the worshipful justice
knows Mother Rigby!"

Here the witch thrust her wrinkled face close to the puppet's,
chuckling irrepressibly, and fidgeting all through her system with
delight at the idea which she meant to communicate.

"The worshipful Master Gookin," whispered she, "hath a comely maiden to
his daughter. And hark ye, my pet. Thou hast a fair outside and a
pretty wit enough of thine own. Yea, a pretty wit enough! Thou wilt
think better of it when thou hast seen more of other people's wits. Now
with thy outside and thy inside thou art the very man to win a young
girl's heart. Never doubt it; I tell thee it shall be so. Put but a
bold face on the matter, sigh, smile, flourish thy hat, thrust forth
thy leg like a dancing-master, put thy right hand to the left side of
thy waistcoat, and pretty Polly Gookin is thine own."

All this while the new creature had been sucking in and exhaling
the vapory fragrance of his pipe and seemed now to continue this
occupation as much for the enjoyment it afforded as because it was
an essential condition of his existence. It was wonderful to see how
exceedingly like a human being it behaved. Its eyes (for it appeared
to possess a pair) were bent on Mother Rigby, and at suitable junctures
it nodded or shook its head. Neither did it lack words proper for the
occasion--"Really!"--"Indeed!"--"Pray tell me!"--"Is it possible!"--"Upon
 my word!"--"By no means!"--"Oh!"--"Ah!"--"Hem!" and other such weighty
 utterances as imply attention, inquiry, acquiescence, or dissent on
 the part of the auditor. Even had you stood by and seen the scarecrow
 made, you could scarcely have resisted the conviction that it
 perfectly understood the cunning counsels which the old witch poured
 into its counterfeit of an ear. The more earnestly it applied its lips
 to the pipe, the more distinctly was its human likeness stamped among
 visible realities, the more sagacious grew its expression, the more
 lifelike its gestures and movements, and the more intelligibly audible
 its voice. Its garments too glistened so much the brighter with an
 illusory magnificence. The very pipe in which burned the spell of all
 this wonder-work ceased to appear as a smoke-blackened earthern stump,
 and became a meerschaum with painted bowl and amber mouthpiece.

It might be apprehended, however, that, as the life of the illusion
seemed identical with the vapor of the pipe, it would terminate
simultaneously with the reduction of the tobacco to ashes. But the
beldam foresaw the difficulty.

"Hold thou the pipe, my precious one," said she, "while I fill it for
thee again."

It was sorrowful to behold how the fine gentleman began to fade back
into a scarecrow while Mother Rigby shook the ashes out of the pipe and
proceeded to replenish it from her tobacco-box.

"Dickon," cried she, in her high, sharp tone, "another coal for this
pipe."

No sooner said than the intensely red speck of fire was glowing within
the pipe-bowl and the scarecrow, without waiting for the witch's
bidding, applied the tube to his lips and drew in a few short,
convulsive whiffs, which soon however became regular and equable.

"Now, mine own heart's darling," quoth Mother Rigby, "whatever may
happen to thee, thou must stick to thy pipe. Thy life is in it; and
that, at least, thou knowest well, if thou knowest nought besides.
Stick to thy pipe, I say! Smoke, puff, blow thy cloud, and tell the
people, if any question be made, that it is for thy health and that so
the physician orders thee to do. And, sweet one, when thou shalt find
thy pipe getting low, go apart into some corner, and--first filling
thyself with smoke--cry sharply, 'Dickon, a fresh pipe of tobacco!' and
'Dickon, another coal for my pipe!' and have it into thy pretty mouth
as speedily as may be, else instead of a gallant gentleman in a
gold-laced coat, thou wilt be but a jumble of sticks, and tattered
clothes, and a bag of straw, and a withered pumpkin. Now depart, my
treasure, and good luck go with thee!"

"Never fear, mother," said the figure, in a stout voice, and sending
forth a courageous whiff of smoke. "I will thrive if an honest man and
a gentleman may."

"Oh, thou wilt be the death of me!" cried the old witch, convulsed with
laughter. "That was well said! If an honest man and a gentleman may!
Thou playest thy part to perfection. Get along with thee for a smart
fellow and I will wager on thy head, as a man of pith and substance,
with a brain and what they call a heart, and all else that a man should
have against any other thing on two legs. I hold myself a better witch
than yesterday for thy sake. Did I not make thee? And I defy any witch
in New England to make such another! Here! take my staff along with
thee."

The staff, though it was but a plain oaken stick, immediately took the
aspect of a gold-headed cane.

"That gold head has as much sense in it as thine own," said Mother
Rigby, "and it will guide thee straight to worshipful Master Gookin's
door. Get thee gone, my pretty pet, my darling, my precious one, my
treasure; and if any ask thy name, it is 'Feathertop,' for thou hast a
feather in thy hat and I have thrust a handful of feathers into the
hollow of thy head. And thy wig, too, is of the fashion they call
'feathertop'; so be 'Feathertop' thy name."

And issuing from the cottage, Feathertop strode manfully towards town.
Mother Rigby stood at the threshold, well pleased to see how the
sunbeams glistened on him, as if all his magnificence were real, and
how diligently and lovingly he smoked his pipe, and how handsomely he
walked in spite of a little stiffness of his legs. She watched him
until out of sight and threw a witch-benediction after her darling when
a turn of the road snatched him from her view.

Betimes in the forenoon, when the principal street of the neighboring
town was just at its acme of life and bustle, a stranger of very
distinguished figure was seen on the sidewalk. His port as well as his
garments betokened nothing short of nobility. He wore a richly
embroidered plum-colored coat, a waistcoat of costly velvet
magnificently adorned with golden foliage, a pair of splendid scarlet
breeches and the finest and glossiest of white silk stockings. His head
was covered with a peruke so daintily powdered and adjusted that it
would have been sacrilege to disorder it with a hat, which, therefore
(and it was a gold-laced hat set off with a snowy feather), he carried
beneath his arm. On the breast of his coat glistened a star. He managed
his gold-headed cane with an airy grace peculiar to the fine gentlemen
of the period and, to give the highest possible finish to his
equipment, he had lace ruffles at his wrist of a most ethereal
delicacy, sufficiently avouching how idle and aristocratic must be the
hands which they half-concealed.

It was a remarkable point in the accoutrement of this brilliant
personage that he held in his left hand a fantastic kind of pipe with
an exquisitely painted bow and an amber mouthpiece. This he applied to
his lips as often as every five or six paces and inhaled a deep whiff
of smoke, which after being retained a moment in his lungs might be
seen to eddy gracefully from his mouth and nostrils.

As may well be supposed, the street was all astir to find out the
stranger's name.

"It is some great nobleman, beyond question," said one of the
townspeople. "Do you see the star at his breast?"

"Nay, it is too bright to be seen," said another. "Yes, he must needs
be a nobleman, as you say. But by what conveyance, think you, can his
Lordship have voyaged or traveled hither? There has been no vessel from
the old country for a month past; and if he have arrived overland from
the southward, pray where are his attendants and equipage?"

"He needs no equipage to set off his rank," remarked a third. "If he
came among us in rags, nobility would shine through a hole in his
elbow. I never saw such dignity of aspect. He has the old Norman
blood[191-1] in his veins, I warrant him."

"I rather take him to be a Dutchman or one of your High Germans," said
another citizen. "The men of those countries have always the pipe at
their mouths."

"And so has a Turk," answered his companion. "But in my judgment, this
stranger hath been bred at the French court and hath there learned
politeness and grace of manner which none understand so well as the
nobility of France. That gait, now! A vulgar spectator might deem it
stiff--he might call it a hitch and jerk--but, to my eye, it hath an
unspeakable majesty and must have been acquired by constant observation
of the deportment of the Grand Monarque. The stranger's character and
office are evident enough. He is a French ambassador come to treat with
our rulers about the cession of Canada."

"More probably a Spaniard," said another, "and hence his yellow
complexion. Or most likely he is from the Havana or from some port on
the Spanish main and comes to make investigation about the piracies
which our governor is thought to connive at. Those settlers in Peru and
Mexico have skins as yellow as the gold which they dig out of their
mines."

"Yellow or not," cried a lady, "he is a beautiful man! So tall, so
slender! Such a fine, noble face, with so well shaped a nose and all
that delicacy of expression about the mouth! And, bless me! how bright
his star is! It positively shoots out flames."

"So do your eyes, fair lady," said the stranger, with a bow and a
flourish of his pipe, for he was just passing at the instant. "Upon my
honor, they have quite dazzled me!"

"Was ever so original and exquisite a compliment?" murmured the lady,
in an ecstasy of delight.

Amid the general admiration excited by the stranger's appearance there
were only two dissenting voices. One was that of an impertinent cur
which, after sniffing at the heels of the glistening figure, put its
tail between its legs and skulked into its master's backyard,
vociferating an execrable howl. The other dissentient was a young child
who squalled at the fullest stretch of his lungs and babbled some
unintelligible nonsense about a pumpkin.

Feathertop, meanwhile, pursued his way along the street. Except for the
few complimentary words to the lady, and now and then a slight
inclination of the head in requital of the profound reverences of the
bystanders, he seemed wholly absorbed in his pipe. There needed no
other proof of his rank and consequence than the perfect equanimity
with which he comported himself, while the curiosity and admiration of
the town swelled almost into a clamor around him. With a crowd
gathering behind his footsteps, he finally reached the mansion-house of
the worshipful Justice Gookin, entered the gate, ascended the steps of
the front door and knocked. In the interim before his summons was
answered the stranger was observed to shake the ashes out of his pipe.

"What did he say in that sharp voice?" inquired one of the spectators.

"Nay, I know not," answered his friend. "But the sun dazzles my eyes
strangely. How dim and faded His Lordship looks all of a sudden! Bless
my wits, what is the matter with me?"

"The wonder is," said the other, "that his pipe, which was out an
instant ago, should be all alight again and with the reddest coal I
ever saw. There is something mysterious about this stranger. What a
whiff of smoke was that! 'Dim and faded,' did you call him? Why, as he
turns about the star on his breast is all ablaze."

"It is, indeed," said his companion, "and it will go near to dazzle
pretty Polly Gookin, whom I see peeping at it out of the chamber
window."

The door being now opened, Feathertop turned to the crowd, made a
stately bend of his body, like a great man acknowledging the reverence
of the meaner sort, and vanished into the house. There was a mysterious
kind of a smile--if it might not better be called a grin or
grimace--upon his visage, but of all the throng that beheld him not an
individual appears to have possessed insight enough to detect the
illusive character of the stranger, except a little child and a
cur-dog.

Our legend here loses somewhat of its continuity, and, passing over the
preliminary explanation between Feathertop and the merchant, goes in
quest of the pretty Polly Gookin. She was a damsel of a soft, round
figure with light hair and blue eyes, and a fair rosy face which seemed
neither very shrewd nor very simple. This young lady had caught a
glimpse of the glistening stranger while standing at the threshold and
had forthwith put on a laced cap, a string of beads, her finest
kerchief and her stiffest damask petticoat, in preparation for the
interview. Hurrying from her chamber to the parlor, she had ever since
been viewing herself in the large looking-glass and practising pretty
airs--now a smile, now a ceremonious dignity of aspect, and now a
softer smile than the former, kissing her hand likewise, tossing her
head and managing her fan, while within the mirror an unsubstantial
little maid repeated every gesture and did all the foolish things that
Polly did, but without making her ashamed of them. In short, it was the
fault of pretty Polly's ability, rather than her will, if she failed to
be as complete an artifice as the illustrious Feathertop himself; and
when she thus tampered with her own simplicity, the witch's phantom
might well hope to win her.

No sooner did Polly hear her father's gouty footsteps approaching the
parlor door, accompanied with the stiff clatter of Feathertop's
high-heeled shoes, than she seated herself bolt upright and innocently
began warbling a song.

"Polly! Daughter Polly!" cried the old merchant. "Come hither, child."

Master Gookin's aspect, as he opened the door, was doubtful and
troubled.

"This gentleman," continued he, presenting the stranger, "is the
chevalier Feathertop--nay, I beg his pardon, My Lord Feathertop--who
hath brought me a token of remembrance from an ancient friend of mine.
Pay your duty to His Lordship, child, and honor him as his quality
deserves."

After these few words of introduction the worshipful magistrate
immediately quitted the room. But even in that brief moment, had the
fair Polly glanced aside at her father instead of devoting herself
wholly to the brilliant guest, she might have taken warning of some
mischief nigh at hand. The old man was nervous, fidgety and very pale.
Purposing a smile of courtesy, he had deformed his face with a sort of
galvanic grin which, when Feathertop's back was turned, he exchanged
for a scowl, at the same time shaking his fist and stamping his gouty
foot--an incivility which brought its retribution along with it. The
truth appears to have been that Mother Rigby's word of introduction,
whatever it might be, had operated far more on the rich merchant's
fears than on his good-will. Moreover, being a man of wonderfully acute
observation, he had noticed that the painted figures on the bowl of
Feathertop's pipe were in motion. Looking more closely, he became
convinced that these figures were a party of little demons, each duly
provided with horns and a tail, and dancing hand in hand with gestures
of diabolical merriment round the circumference of the pipe-bowl. As if
to confirm his suspicions, while Master Gookin ushered his guest along
a dusky passage from his private room to the parlor, the star on
Feathertop's breast had scintillated actual flames, and threw a
flickering gleam upon the wall, the ceiling and the door.

With such sinister prognostics manifesting themselves on all hands, it
is not to be marveled at that the merchant should have felt that he was
committing his daughter to a very questionable acquaintance. He cursed
in his secret soul the insinuating elegance of Feathertop's manners as
this brilliant personage bowed, smiled, put his hand on his heart,
inhaled a long whiff from his pipe, and enriched the atmosphere with
the smoky vapor of a fragrant and visible sigh. Gladly would poor
Master Gookin have thrust his dangerous guest into the street, but
there was a restraint and terror within him. This respectable old
gentleman, we fear, at an earlier period of life had given some pledge
or other to the Evil Principle, and perhaps was now to redeem it by the
sacrifice of his daughter.

It so happened that the parlor door was partly of glass shaded by a
silken curtain the folds of which hung a little awry. So strong was the
merchant's interest in witnessing what was to ensue between the fair
Polly and the gallant Feathertop that after quitting the room he could
by no means refrain from peeping through the crevice of the curtain.
But there was nothing very miraculous to be seen--nothing except the
trifles previously noticed, to confirm the idea of a supernatural peril
environing the pretty Polly. The stranger, it is true, was evidently a
thorough and practised man of the world, systematic and self-possessed,
and therefore the sort of person to whom a parent ought not to confide
a simple young girl without due watchfulness for the result. The worthy
magistrate, who had been conversant with all degrees and qualities of
mankind, could not but perceive every motion and gesture of the
distinguished Feathertop came in its proper place. Nothing had been
left rude or native in him; a well-digested conventionalism had
incorporated itself thoroughly with his substance and transformed him
into a work of art. Perhaps it was this peculiarity that invested him
with a species of ghastliness and awe. It is the effect of anything
completely and consummately artificial in human shape that the person
impresses us as an unreality, and as having hardly pith enough to cast
a shadow upon the floor. As regarded Feathertop, all this resulted in a
wild, extravagant, and fantastical impression, as if his life and being
were akin to the smoke that curled upward from his pipe.

But pretty Polly Gookin felt not thus. The pair were now promenading
the room--Feathertop with his dainty stride, and no less dainty
grimace, the girl with a native maidenly grace just touched, not
spoiled, by a slightly affected manner which seemed caught from the
perfect artifice of her companion. The longer the interview continued,
the more charmed was pretty Polly, until within the first quarter of an
hour (as the old magistrate noted by his watch) she was evidently
beginning to be in love. Nor need it have been witchcraft that subdued
her in such a hurry: the poor child's heart, it may be, was so very
fervent that it melted her with its own warmth, as reflected from the
hollow semblance of a lover. No matter what Feathertop said, his words
found depth and reverberation in her ear; no matter what he did, his
action was very heroic to her eye. And by this time, it is to be
supposed, there was a blush on Polly's cheek, a tender smile about her
mouth, and a liquid softness in her glance, while the star kept
coruscating on Feathertop's breast, and the little demons careered with
more frantic merriment than ever about the circumference of his
pipe-bowl. Oh, pretty Polly Gookin! Why should these imps rejoice so
madly that a silly maiden's heart was about to be given to a shadow? Is
it so unusual a misfortune--so rare a triumph?

By and by Feathertop paused and, throwing himself into an imposing
attitude, seemed to summon the fair girl to survey his figure and
resist him longer if she could. His star, his embroidery, his buckles,
glowed at that instant with unutterable splendor; the picturesque hues
of his attire took a richer depth of coloring; there was a gleam and
polish over his whole presence betokening the perfect witchery of
well-ordered manners. The maiden raised her eyes and suffered them to
linger upon her companion with a bashful and admiring gaze. Then, as if
desirous of judging what value her own simple comeliness might have
side by side with so much brilliancy, she cast a glance toward the
full-length looking glass in front of which they happened to be
standing. It was one of the truest plates in the world and incapable of
flattery. No sooner did the images therein reflected meet Polly's eye
than she shrieked, shrank from the stranger's side, gazed at him a
moment in the wildest dismay, and sank insensible upon the floor.
Feathertop, likewise, had looked toward the mirror, and there beheld,
not the glittering mockery of his outside show, but a picture of the
sordid patchwork of his real composition stripped of all witchcraft.

The wretched simulacrum! We almost pity him. He threw up his arms with
an expression of despair that went farther than any of his previous
manifestations toward vindicating his claims to be reckoned human. For
perchance the only time since this so often empty and deceptive life of
mortals began its course, an illusion had seen and fully recognized
itself.

Mother Rigby was seated by her kitchen hearth in the twilight of this
eventful day and had just shaken the ashes out of a new pipe, when she
heard a hurried tramp along the road. Yet it did not seem so much the
tramp of human footsteps as the clatter of sticks or the rattling of
dry bones.

"Ha!" thought the old witch, "what step is that? Whose skeleton is out
of its grave now, I wonder?"

A figure burst headlong into the cottage door. It was Feathertop. His
pipe was still alight, the star still flamed upon his breast, the
embroidery still glowed upon his garments, nor had he lost in any
degree or manner that could be estimated the aspect that assimilated
him with our mortal brotherhood. But yet, in some indescribable way (as
is the case with all that has deluded us when once found out), the poor
reality was felt beneath the cunning artifice.

"What has gone wrong?" demanded the witch. "Did yonder sniffling
hypocrite thrust my darling from his door? The villain! I'll set twenty
fiends to torture him till he offer thee his daughter on his bended
knees!"

"No, mother," said Feathertop, despondingly; "it was not that."

"Did the girl scorn my precious one?" asked Mother Rigby, her fierce
eyes glowing like two coals of Tophet. "I'll cover her face with
pimples! Her nose shall be as red as the coal in thy pipe! Her front
teeth shall drop out! In a week hence she shall not be worth thy
having."

"Let her alone, mother," answered poor Feathertop. "The girl was half
won, and methinks a kiss from her sweet lips might have made me
altogether human. But," he added after a brief pause and then a howl of
self-contempt, "I've seen myself, mother! I've seen myself for the
wretched, ragged, empty thing I am. I'll exist no longer."

Snatching the pipe from his mouth, he flung it with all his might
against the chimney, and at the same instant sank upon the floor, a
medley of straw and tattered garments, with some sticks protruding from
the heap and a shriveled pumpkin in the midst. The eyeholes were now
lustreless but the rudely carved gap that just before had been a mouth
still seemed to twist itself into a despairing grin, and was so far
human.

"Poor fellow!" quoth Mother Rigby, with a rueful glance at the relics
of her ill-fated contrivance. "My poor, dear, pretty Feathertop! There
are thousands upon thousands of coxcombs and charlatans in the world
made up of just such a jumble of worn-out, forgotten and
good-for-nothing trash as he was, yet they live in fair repute, and
never see themselves for what they are. And why should my poor puppet
be the only one to know himself and perish for it?"

While thus muttering the witch had filled a fresh pipe of tobacco, and
held the stem between her fingers, as doubtful whether to thrust it
into her own mouth or Feathertop's.

"Poor Feathertop!" she continued. "I could easily give him another
chance, and send him forth again to-morrow. But no! His feelings are
too tender--his sensibilities too deep. He seems to have too much heart
to bustle for his own advantage in such an empty and heartless world.
Well, well! I'll make a scarecrow of him, after all. 'Tis an innocent
and useful vocation, and will suit my darling well; and if each of his
human brethren had as fit a one, 'twould be the better for mankind. And
as for his pipe of tobacco, I need it more than he."

So saying, Mother Rigby put the stem between her lips.

"Dickon," cried she, in her high, sharp tone, "another coal for my
pipe!"




ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE

The Red-Headed League


I had called upon my friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,[203-1] one day in the
autumn of last year, and found him in deep conversation with a very
stout, florid-faced, elderly gentleman, with fiery red hair. With an
apology for my intrusion, I was about to withdraw, when Holmes pulled
me abruptly into the room, and closed the door behind me.

"You could not possibly have come at a better time, my dear Watson," he
said, cordially.

"I was afraid that you were engaged."

"So I am. Very much so."

"Then I can wait in the next room."

"Not at all. This gentleman, Mr. Wilson, has been my partner and helper
in many of my most successful cases, and I have no doubt that he will
be of the utmost use to me in yours also."

The stout gentleman half rose from his chair and gave a bob of
greeting, with a quick, little, questioning glance from his small,
fat-encircled eyes.

"Try the settee," said Holmes, relapsing into his arm-chair and putting
his finger-tips together, as was his custom when in judicial moods. "I
know, my dear Watson, that you share my love of all that is bizarre and
outside the conventions and humdrum routine of everyday life. You have
shown your relish for it by the enthusiasm which has prompted you to
chronicle, and, if you will excuse my saying so, somewhat to embellish
so many of my own little adventures."

"Your cases have indeed been of the greatest interest to me," I
observed.

"You will remember that I remarked the other day, just before we went
into the very simple problem presented by Miss Mary Sutherland, that
for strange effects and extraordinary combinations we must go to life
itself, which is always far more daring than any effort of the
imagination."

"A proposition which I took the liberty of doubting."

"You did, doctor, but none the less you must come round to my view, for
otherwise I shall keep on piling fact upon fact on you, until your
reason breaks down under them and acknowledges me to be right. Now, Mr.
Jabez Wilson here has been good enough to call upon me this morning,
and to begin a narrative which promises to be one of the most singular
which I have listened to for some time. You have heard me remark that
the strangest and most unique things are very often connected not with
the larger but with the smaller crimes, and occasionally, indeed, where
there is room for doubt whether any positive crime has been committed.
As far as I have heard, it is impossible for me to say whether the
present case is an instance of crime or not, but the course of events
is certainly among the most singular that I have ever listened to.
Perhaps, Mr. Wilson, you would have the great kindness to recommence
your narrative. I ask you, not merely because my friend, Dr. Watson,
has not heard the opening part, but also because the peculiar nature of
the story makes me anxious to have every possible detail from your
lips. As a rule, when I have heard some slight indication of the course
of events, I am able to guide myself by the thousands of other similar
cases which occur to my memory. In the present instance I am forced to
admit that the facts are, to the best of my belief, unique."

The portly client puffed out his chest with an appearance of some
little pride, and pulled a dirty and wrinkled newspaper from the inside
pocket of his great-coat. As he glanced down the advertising column,
with his head thrust forward, and the paper flattened out upon his
knee, I took a good look at the man, and endeavored, after the fashion
of my companion, to read the indications which might be presented by
his dress or appearance.

I did not gain very much, however, by my inspection. Our visitor bore
every mark of being an average commonplace British tradesman, obese,
pompous, and slow. He wore rather baggy gray shepherd's check trousers,
a not over-clean black frock-coat, unbuttoned in the front, and a drab
waistcoat with a heavy brassy Albert chain, and a square pierced bit of
metal dangling down as an ornament. A frayed top-hat and a faded brown
overcoat with a wrinkled velvet collar lay upon a chair beside him.
Altogether, look as I would, there was nothing remarkable about the man
save his blazing red head, and the expression of extreme chagrin and
discontent upon his features.

Sherlock Holmes's quick eye took in my occupation, and he shook his
head with a smile as he noticed my questioning glances, "Beyond the
obvious facts that he has at some time done manual labor, that he takes
snuff, that he is a Freemason,[206-1] that he has been in China, and
that he has done a considerable amount of writing lately, I can deduce
nothing else."

Mr. Jabez Wilson started up in his chair, with his forefinger upon the
paper, but with his eyes upon my companion.

"How, in the name of good fortune, did you know all that, Mr. Holmes?"
he asked. "How did you know, for example, that I did manual labor? It's
as true as gospel, for I began as a ship's carpenter."

"Your hands, my dear sir. Your right hand is quite a size larger than
your left. You have worked with it, and the muscles are more
developed."

"Well, the snuff, then, and the Freemasonry?"

"I won't insult your intelligence by telling you how I read that,
especially as, rather against the strict rules of your order, you use
an arc-and-compass breastpin."

"Ah, of course, I forgot that. But the writing?"

"What else can be indicated by that right cuff so very shiny for five
inches, and the left one with the smooth patch near the elbow where you
rest it upon the desk?"

"Well, but China?"

"The fish that you have tattooed immediately above your right wrist
could only have been done in China. I have made a small study of tattoo
marks, and have even contributed to the literature of the subject. That
trick of staining the fishes' scales of a delicate pink is quite
peculiar to China. When, in addition, I see a Chinese coin hanging from
your watch-chain, the matter becomes even more simple."

Mr. Jabez Wilson laughed heavily. "Well, I never!" said he. "I thought
at first that you had done something clever, but I see that there was
nothing in it, after all."

"I begin to think, Watson," said Holmes, "that I make a mistake in
explaining. '_Omne ignotum pro magnifico_,'[207-1] you know, and my
poor little reputation, such as it is, will suffer shipwreck if I am so
candid. Can you not find the advertisement, Mr. Wilson?"

"Yes, I have got it now," he answered, with his thick, red finger
planted half-way down the column. "Here it is. This is what began it
all. You just read it for yourself, sir."

I took the paper from him, and read as follows:

    To the Red-Headed League: On account of the bequest of the late
    Ezekiah Hopkins, of Lebanon, Pa., U. S. A., there is now another
    vacancy open which entitles a member of the League to a salary of
    L4 a week for purely nominal services. All red-headed men who are
    sound in body and mind, and above the age of twenty-one, are
    eligible. Apply in person on Monday, at eleven o'clock, to Duncan
    Ross, at the offices of the League, 7 Pope's Court, Fleet Street.

"What on earth does this mean?" I ejaculated, after I had twice read
over the extraordinary announcement.

Holmes chuckled, and wriggled in his chair, as was his habit when in
high spirits. "It is a little off the beaten track, isn't it?" said he.
"And now, Mr. Wilson, off you go at scratch, and tell us all about
yourself, your household, and the effect which this advertisement had
upon your fortunes. You will first make a note, doctor, of the paper
and the date."

"It is _The Morning Chronicle_, of April 27, 1890. Just two months
ago."

"Very good. Now, Mr. Wilson?"

"Well, it is just as I have been telling you, Mr. Sherlock Holmes,"
said Jabez Wilson, mopping his forehead; "I have a small pawnbroker's
business at Coburg Square, near the city. It's not a very large affair,
and of late years it has not done more than just give me a living. I
used to be able to keep two assistants, but now I only keep one; and I
would have a job to pay him, but that he is willing to come for half
wages, so as to learn the business."

"What is the name of this obliging youth?" asked Sherlock Holmes.

"His name is Vincent Spaulding, and he's not such a youth, either. It's
hard to say his age. I should not wish a smarter assistant, Mr. Holmes;
and I know very well that he could better himself, and earn twice what
I am able to give him. But, after all, if he is satisfied, why should I
put ideas in his head?"

"Why, indeed? You seem most fortunate in having an employe who comes
under the full market price. It is not a common experience among
employers in this age. I don't know that your assistant is not as
remarkable as your advertisement."

"Oh, he has his faults, too," said Mr. Wilson. "Never was such a fellow
for photography. Snapping away with a camera when he ought to be
improving his mind, and then diving down into the cellar like a rabbit
into his hole to develop his pictures. That is his main fault; but, on
the whole, he's a good worker. There's no vice in him."

"He is still with you, I presume?"

"Yes, sir. He and a girl of fourteen, who does a bit of simple cooking,
and keeps the place clean--that's all I have in the house, for I am a
widower, and never had any family. We live very quietly, sir, the three
of us; and we keep a roof over our heads, and pay our debts, if we do
nothing more.

"The first thing that put us out was that advertisement. Spaulding, he
came down into the office just this day eight weeks, with this very
paper in his hand, and he says:

"'I wish to the Lord, Mr. Wilson, that I was a red-headed man.'

"'Why that?' I asks.

"'Why,' says he, 'here's another vacancy on the League of the
Red-headed Men. It's worth quite a little fortune to any man who gets
it, and I understand that there are more vacancies than there are men,
so that the trustees are at their wits' end what to do with the money.
If my hair would only change color, here's a nice little crib all ready
for me to step into.'

"'Why, what is it, then?' I asked. You see, Mr. Holmes, I am a very
stay-at-home man, and as my business came to me instead of my having to
go to it, I was often weeks on end without putting my foot over the
door-mat. In that way I didn't know much of what was going on outside,
and I was always glad of a bit of news.

"'Have you never heard of the League of the Red-headed Men?' he asked,
with his eyes open.

"'Never.'

"'Why, I wonder at that, for you are eligible yourself for one of the
vacancies.'

"'And what are they worth?' I asked.

"'Oh, merely a couple of hundred a year, but the work is slight, and it
need not interfere very much with one's other occupations.'

"Well, you can easily think that that made me prick up my ears, for the
business has not been over-good for some years, and an extra couple of
hundred would have been very handy.

"'Tell me all about it,' said I.

"'Well,' said he, showing me the advertisement, 'you can see for
yourself that the League has a vacancy, and there is the address where
you should apply for particulars. As far as I can make out, the League
was founded by an American millionaire, Ezekiah Hopkins, who was very
peculiar in his ways. He was himself red-headed, and he had a great
sympathy for all red-headed men; so, when he died, it was found that he
had left his enormous fortune in the hands of trustees, with
instructions to apply the interest to the providing of easy berths to
men whose hair is of that color. From all I hear it is splendid pay,
and very little to do.'

"'But,' said I, 'there would be millions of red-headed men who would
apply.'

"'Not so many as you might think,' he answered. 'You see it is really
confined to Londoners, and to grown men. This American had started from
London when he was young, and he wanted to do the old town a good turn.
Then, again, I have heard it is no use your applying if your hair is
light red, or dark red, or anything but real bright, blazing, fiery
red. Now, if you cared to apply, Mr. Wilson, you would just walk in;
but perhaps it would hardly be worth your while to put yourself out of
the way for the sake of a few hundred pounds.'

"Now, it is a fact, gentlemen, as you may see for yourselves, that my
hair is of a very full and rich tint, so that it seemed to me that, if
there was to be any competition in the matter, I stood as good a chance
as any man that I had ever met. Vincent Spaulding seemed to know so
much about it that I thought he might prove useful, so I just ordered
him to put up the shutters for the day, and to come right away with me.
He was very willing to have a holiday, so we shut the business up, and
started off for the address that was given us in the advertisement.

"I never hope to see such a sight as that again, Mr. Holmes. From
north, south, east, and west every man who had a shade of red in his
hair had tramped into the city to answer the advertisement. Fleet
Street was choked with red-headed folk, and Pope's Court looked like a
coster's orange barrow. I should not have thought there were so many in
the whole country as were brought together by that single
advertisement. Every shade of color they were--straw, lemon, orange,
brick, Irish-setter, liver, clay; but, as Spaulding said, there were
not many who had the real vivid flame-colored tint. When I saw how many
were waiting, I would have given it up in despair; but Spaulding would
not hear of it. How he did it I could not imagine, but he pushed and
pulled and butted until he got me through the crowd, and right up to
the steps which led to the office. There was a double stream upon the
stair, some going up in hope, and some coming back dejected; but we
wedged in as well as we could, and soon found ourselves in the office."

"Your experience has been a most entertaining one," remarked Holmes, as
his client paused and refreshed his memory with a huge pinch of snuff.
"Pray continue your very interesting statement."

"There was nothing in the office but a couple of wooden chairs and a
deal table, behind which sat a small man, with a head that was even
redder than mine. He said a few words to each candidate as he came up,
and then he always managed to find some fault in them which would
disqualify them. Getting a vacancy did not seem to be such a very easy
matter, after all. However, when our turn came, the little man was much
more favorable to me than to any of the others, and he closed the door
as we entered, so that he might have a private word with us.

"'This is Mr. Jabez Wilson,' said my assistant, 'and he is willing to
fill a vacancy in the League.'

"'And he is admirably suited for it,' the other answered. 'He has every
requirement. I cannot recall when I have seen anything so fine.' He
took a step backward, cocked his head on one side, and gazed at my hair
until I felt quite bashful. Then he suddenly plunged forward, wrung my
hand, and congratulated me warmly on my success.

"'It would be injustice to hesitate,' said he. 'You will, however, I am
sure, excuse me for taking an obvious precaution.' With that he seized
my hair in both his hands, and pulled until I yelled with the pain.
'There is water in your eyes,' said he, as he released me. 'I perceive
that all is as it should be. But we have to be careful, for we have
twice been deceived by wigs and once by paint. I could tell you tales
of cobbler's wax which would disgust you with human nature.' He stepped
over to the window, and shouted through it at the top of his voice that
the vacancy was filled. A groan of disappointment came up from below,
and the folk all trooped away in different directions, until there was
not a red head to be seen except my own and that of the manager.

"'My name,' said he, 'is Mr. Duncan Ross, and I am myself one of the
pensioners upon the fund left by our noble benefactor. Are you a
married man, Mr. Wilson? Have you a family?'

"I answered that I had not.

"His face fell immediately.

"'Dear me!' he said, gravely, 'that is very serious indeed! I am sorry
to hear you say that. The fund was, of course, for the propagation and
spread of the red-heads as well as for their maintenance. It is
exceedingly unfortunate that you should be a bachelor.'

"My face lengthened at this, Mr. Holmes, for I thought that I was not
to have the vacancy after all; but, after thinking it over for a few
minutes, he said that it would be all right.

"'In the case of another,' said he, 'the objection might be fatal, but
we must stretch a point in favor of a man with such a head of hair as
yours. When shall you be able to enter upon your new duties?'

"'Well, it is a little awkward, for I have a business already,' said I.

"'Oh, never mind about that, Mr. Wilson!' said Vincent Spaulding. 'I
shall be able to look after that for you.'

"'What would be the hours?' I asked.

"'Ten to two.'

"Now a pawnbroker's business is mostly done of an evening, Mr. Holmes,
especially Thursday and Friday evenings, which is just before pay-day,
so it would suit me very well to earn a little in the mornings.
Besides, I knew that my assistant was a good man, and that he would see
to anything that turned up.

"'That would suit me very well,' said I. 'And the pay?'

"'Is L4 a week.'

"'And the work?'

"'Is purely nominal.'

"'What do you call purely nominal?'

"'Well, you have to be in the office, or at least in the building, the
whole time. If you leave, you forfeit your whole position forever. The
will is very clear upon that point. You don't comply with the
conditions if you budge from the office during that time.'

"'It's only four hours a day, and I should not think of leaving,' said
I.

"'No excuse will avail,' said Mr. Duncan Ross. 'Neither sickness nor
business nor anything else. There you must stay, or you lose your
billet.'

"'And the work?'

"'Is to copy out the "Encyclopaedia Britannica." There is the first
volume of it in that press. You must find your own ink, pens, and
blotting-paper, but we provide this table and chair. Will you be ready
to-morrow?'

"'Certainly,' I answered.

"'Then, good-bye, Mr. Jabez Wilson, and let me congratulate you once
more on the important position which you have been fortunate enough to
gain.' He bowed me out of the room, and I went home with my assistant,
hardly knowing what to say or do, I was so pleased at my own good
fortune.

"Well, I thought over the matter all day, and by evening I was in low
spirits again; for I had quite persuaded myself that the whole affair
might be some great hoax or fraud, though what its object might be I
could not imagine. It seemed altogether past belief that any one could
make such a will, or that they would pay such a sum for doing anything
so simple as copying out the 'Encyclopaedia Britannica.' Vincent
Spaulding did what he could to cheer me up, but by bed-time I had
reasoned myself out of the whole thing. However, in the morning I
determined to have a look at it anyhow, so I bought a penny bottle of
ink, and with a quill-pen, and seven sheets of foolscap paper, I
started off for Pope's Court.

"Well, to my surprise and delight, everything was as right as possible.
The table was set out ready for me, and Mr. Duncan Ross was there to
see that I got fairly to work. He started me off upon the letter A, and
then he left me; but he would drop in from time to time to see that all
was right with me. At two o'clock he bade me good-day, complimented me
upon the amount that I had written, and locked the door of the office
after me.

"This went on day after day, Mr. Holmes, and on Saturday the manager
came in and planked down four golden sovereigns for my week's work. It
was the same next week, and the same the week after. Every morning I
was there at ten, and every afternoon I left at two. By degrees Mr.
Duncan Ross took to coming in only once of a morning, and then, after a
time, he did not come in at all. Still, of course, I never dared to
leave the room for an instant, for I was not sure when he might come,
and the billet was such a good one, and suited me so well, that I would
not risk the loss of it.

"Eight weeks passed away like this, and I had written about Abbots and
Archery and Armor and Architecture and Attica, and hoped with diligence
that I might get on to the B's before very long. It cost me something
in foolscap, and I had pretty nearly filled a shelf with my writings.
And then suddenly the whole business came to an end."

"To an end?"

"Yes, sir. And no later than this morning. I went to my work as usual
at ten o'clock, but the door was shut and locked, with a little square
of cardboard hammered on to the middle of the panel with a tack. Here
it is, and you can read for yourself."

He held up a piece of white cardboard about the size of a sheet of
note-paper. It read in this fashion:

    THE RED-HEADED LEAGUE
             IS
         DISSOLVED

             October, 9, 1890.

Sherlock Holmes and I surveyed this curt announcement and the rueful
face behind it, until the comical side of the affair so completely
overtopped every other consideration that we both burst out into a roar
of laughter.

"I cannot see that there is anything very funny," cried our client,
flushing up to the roots of his flaming hair. "If you can do nothing
better than laugh at me, I can go elsewhere."

"No, no," cried Holmes, shoving him back into the chair from which he
had half risen. "I really wouldn't miss your case for the world. It is
most refreshingly unusual. But there is, if you will excuse my saying
so, something just a little funny about it. Pray, what steps did you
take when you found the card upon the door?"

"I was staggered, sir. I did not know what to do. Then I called at the
offices round, but none of them seemed to know anything about it.
Finally, I went to the landlord, who is an accountant living on the
ground-floor, and I asked him if he could tell me what had become of
the Red-headed League. He said that he had never heard of any such
body. Then I asked him who Mr. Duncan Ross was. He answered that the
name was new to him.

"'Well,' said I, 'the gentleman at No. 4.'

"'What, the red-headed man?'

"'Yes.'

"'Oh,' said he, 'his name was William Morris. He was a solicitor, and
was using my room as a temporary convenience until his new premises
were ready. He moved out yesterday.'

"'Where could I find him?'

"'Oh, at his new offices. He did tell me the address. Yes, 17 King
Edward Street, near St. Paul's.'

"I started off, Mr. Holmes, but when I got to that address it was a
manufactory of artificial knee-caps, and no one in it had ever heard of
either Mr. William Morris or Mr. Duncan Ross."

"And what did you do then?" asked Holmes.

"I went home to Saxe-Coburg Square, and I took the advice of my
assistant. But he could not help me in any way. He could only say that
if I waited I should hear by post. But that was not quite good enough,
Mr. Holmes. I did not wish to lose such a good place without a
struggle, so, as I had heard that you were good enough to give advice
to poor folk who were in need of it, I came right away to you."

"And you did very wisely," said Holmes. "Your case is an exceedingly
remarkable one, and I shall be happy to look into it. From what you
have told me I think that it is possible that graver issues hang from
it than might at first sight appear."

"Grave enough," said Mr. Jabez Wilson. "Why, I have lost four pound a
week."

"As far as you are personally concerned," remarked Holmes, "I do not
see that you have any grievance against this remarkable league. On the
contrary, you are, as I understand, richer by some L30, to say nothing
of the minute knowledge which you have gained on every subject which
comes under the letter A. You have lost nothing by them."

"No, sir. But I want to find out about them, and who they are, and what
their object was in playing this prank--if it was a prank--upon me. It
was a pretty expensive joke for them, for it cost them two and thirty
pounds."

"We shall endeavor to clear up these points for you. And, first, one or
two questions, Mr. Wilson. This assistant of yours who first called
your attention to the advertisement--how long had he been with you?"

"About a month then."

"How did he come?"

"In answer to an advertisement."

"Was he the only applicant?"

"No, I had a dozen."

"Why did you pick him?"

"Because he was handy, and would come cheap."

"At half-wages, in fact?"

"Yes."

"What is he like, this Vincent Spaulding?"

"Small, stout-built, very quick in his ways, no hair on his face,
though he's not short of thirty. Has a white splash of acid upon his
forehead."

Holmes sat up in his chair in considerable excitement. "I thought as
much," said he. "Have you ever observed that his ears are pierced for
earrings?"

"Yes, sir. He told me that a gypsy had done it for him when he was a
lad."

"Hum!" said Holmes, sinking back in deep thought. "He is still with
you?"

"Oh yes, sir; I have only just left him."

"And has your business been attended to in your absence?"

"Nothing to complain of, sir. There's never very much to do of a
morning."

"That will do, Mr. Wilson. I shall be happy to give you an opinion upon
the subject in the course of a day or two. To-day is Saturday, and I
hope that by Monday we may come to a conclusion."

"Well, Watson," said Holmes, when our visitor had left us, "what do you
make of it all?"

"I make nothing of it," I answered, frankly. "It is a most mysterious
business."

"As a rule," said Holmes, "the more bizarre a thing is the less
mysterious it proves to be. It is your commonplace, featureless crimes
which are really puzzling, just as a commonplace face is the most
difficult to identify. But I must be prompt over this matter."

"What are you going to do, then?" I asked.

"To smoke," he answered. "It is quite a three-pipe problem, and I beg
that you won't speak to me for fifty minutes." He curled himself up in
his chair, with his thin knees drawn up to his hawk-like nose, and
there he sat with his eyes closed and his black clay pipe thrusting out
like the bill of some strange bird. I had come to the conclusion that
he had dropped asleep, and indeed was nodding myself, when he suddenly
sprang out of his chair with the gesture of a man who has made up his
mind, and put his pipe down upon the mantelpiece.

"Sarasate[221-1] plays at the St. James's Hall this afternoon," he
remarked. "What do you think, Watson? Could your patients spare you for
a few hours?"

"I have nothing to do to-day. My practice is never very absorbing."

"Then put on your hat and come. I am going through the city first, and
we can have some lunch on the way. I observe that there is a good deal
of German music on the program, which is rather more to my taste than
Italian or French. It is introspective, and I want to introspect. Come
along!"

We traveled by the Underground as far as Aldersgate; and a short walk
took us to Saxe-Coburg Square, the scene of the singular story which we
had listened to in the morning. It was a poky, little, shabby-genteel
place, where four lines of dingy two-storied brick houses looked out
into a small railed-in enclosure, where a lawn of weedy grass and a few
clumps of faded laurel-bushes made a hard fight against a smoke-laden
and uncongenial atmosphere. Three gilt balls and a brown board with
JABEZ WILSON in white letters, upon a corner house announced the place
where our red-headed client carried on his business. Sherlock Holmes
stopped in front of it with his head on one side, and looked it all
over, with his eyes shining brightly between puckered lids. Then he
walked slowly up the street, and then down again to the corner, still
looking keenly at the houses. Finally he returned to the pawn-broker's,
and, having thumped vigorously upon the pavement with his stick two or
three times, he went up to the door and knocked. It was instantly
opened by a bright-looking, clean-shaven young fellow, who asked him to
step in.

"Thank you," said Holmes, "I only wished to ask you how you would go
from here to the Strand."

"Third right, fourth left," answered the assistant, promptly, closing
the door.

"Smart fellow, that," observed Holmes, as we walked away. "He is, in my
judgment, the fourth smartest man in London, and for daring, I am not
sure that he has not a claim to be third. I have known something of him
before."

"Evidently," said I, "Mr. Wilson's assistant counts for a good deal in
this mystery of the Red-headed League. I am sure that you inquired your
way merely in order that you might see him."

"Not him."

"What then?"

"The knees of his trousers."

"And what did you see?"

"What I expected to see."

"Why did you beat the pavement?"

"My dear doctor, this is a time for observation, not for talk. We are
spies in an enemy's country. We know something of Saxe-Coburg Square.
Let us now explore the parts which lie behind it."

The road in which we found ourselves as we turned round the corner from
the retired Saxe-Coburg Square presented as great a contrast to it as
the front of a picture does to the back. It was one of the main
arteries which convey the traffic of the city to the north and west.
The roadway was blocked with the immense stream of commerce flowing in
a double tide inward and outward, while the foot-paths were black with
the hurrying swarm of pedestrians. It was difficult to realize as we
looked at the line of fine shops and stately business premises that
they really abutted on the other side upon the faded and stagnant
square which we had just quitted.

"Let me see," said Holmes, standing at the corner, and glancing along
the line, "I should like just to remember the order of the houses here.
It is a hobby of mine to have an exact knowledge of London. There is
Mortimer's, the tobacconist, the little newspaper shop, the Coburg
branch of the City and Suburban Bank, the Vegetarian Restaurant, and
McFarlane's carriage-building depot. That carries us right on to the
other block. And now, doctor, we've done our work, so it's time we had
some play. A sandwich and a cup of coffee, and then off to violin-land,
where all is sweetness and delicacy and harmony, and there are no
red-headed clients to vex us with their conundrums."

My friend was an enthusiastic musician, being himself not only a very
capable performer, but a composer of no mean merit. All the afternoon
he sat in the stalls wrapped in the most perfect happiness, gently
waving his long, thin fingers in time to the music, while his gently
smiling face and his languid, dreamy eyes were as unlike those of
Holmes, the sleuth-hound,[224-1] Holmes, the relentless, keen-witted,
ready-handed criminal agent, as it was possible to conceive. In his
singular character the dual nature alternately presented itself, and
his extreme exactness and astuteness represented, as I have often
thought, the reaction against the poetic and contemplative mood which
occasionally predominated in him. The swing of his nature took him from
extreme languor to devouring energy; and, as I knew well, he was never
so truly formidable as when, for days on end, he had been lounging in
his arm-chair amid his improvisations and his black-letter editions.
Then it was that the lust of the chase would suddenly come upon him,
and that his brilliant reasoning power would rise to the level of
intuition, until those who were unacquainted with his methods would
look askance at him as on a man whose knowledge was not that of other
mortals. When I saw him that afternoon so enwrapped in the music at St.
James's Hall I felt that an evil time might be coming upon those whom
he had set himself to hunt down.

"You want to go home, no doubt, doctor," he remarked, as we emerged.

"Yes, it would be as well."

"And I have some business to do which will take some hours. This
business at Coburg Square is serious."

"Why serious?"

"A considerable crime is in contemplation. I have every reason to
believe that we shall be in time to stop it. But to-day being Saturday
rather complicates matters. I shall want your help to-night."

"At what time?"

"Ten will be early enough."

"I shall be at Baker Street at ten."

"Very well. And, I say, doctor, there may be some little danger, so
kindly put your army revolver in your pocket." He waved his hand,
turned on his heel, and disappeared in an instant among the crowd.

I trust that I am not more dense than my neighbors, but I was always
oppressed with a sense of my own stupidity in my dealings with Sherlock
Holmes. Here I had heard what he had heard, I had seen what he had
seen, and yet from his words it was evident that he saw clearly not
only what had happened, but what was about to happen, while to me the
whole business was still confused and grotesque. As I drove home to my
house in Kensington I thought it all over, from the extraordinary story
of the red-headed copier of the "Encyclopaedia" down to the visit to
Saxe-Coburg Square, and the ominous words with which he had parted from
me. What was this nocturnal expedition, and why should I go on? Where
were we going, and what were we to do? I had the hint from Holmes that
this smooth-faced pawnbroker's assistant was a formidable man--a man
who might play a deep game. I tried to puzzle it out, but gave it up in
despair, and set the matter aside until night should bring an
explanation.

It was a quarter past nine when I started from home and made my way
across the Park, and so through Oxford Street to Baker Street. Two
hansoms were standing at the door, and, as I entered the passage, I
heard the sound of voices from above. On entering his room I found
Holmes in animated conversation with two men, one of whom I recognized
as Peter Jones, the official police agent, while the other was a long,
thin, sad-faced man, with a very shiny hat and oppressively respectable
frock-coat.

"Ha! our party is complete," said Holmes, buttoning up his pea-jacket,
and taking his heavy hunting crop from the rack. "Watson, I think you
know Mr. Jones, of Scotland Yard? Let me introduce you to Mr.
Merryweather, who is to be our companion in to-night's adventure."

"We're hunting in couples again, doctor, you see," said Jones, in his
consequential way. "Our friend here is a wonderful man for starting a
chase. All he wants is an old dog to help him do the running down."

"I hope a wild goose may not prove to be the end of our chase,"
observed Mr. Merryweather, gloomily.

"You may place considerable confidence in Mr. Holmes, sir," said the
police agent, loftily. "He has his own little methods, which are, if he
won't mind my saying so, just a little too theoretical and fantastic,
but he has the makings of a detective in him. It is not too much to say
that once or twice, as in that business of the Sholto murder and the
Agra treasure,[227-1] he has been more nearly correct than the official
force."

"Oh, if you say so, Mr. Jones, it is all right," said the stranger,
with deference. "Still, I confess that I miss my rubber. It is the
first Saturday night for seven-and-twenty years that I have not had my
rubber."

"I think you will find," said Sherlock Holmes, "that you will play for
a higher stake to-night than you have ever done yet, and that the play
will be more exciting. For you, Mr. Merryweather, the stake will be
some L30,000; and for you, Jones, it will be the man upon whom you wish
to lay your hands."

"John Clay, the murderer, thief, smasher, and forger. He's a young man,
Mr. Merryweather, but he is at the head of his profession, and I would
rather have my bracelets on him than on any criminal in London. He's a
remarkable man, is young John Clay. His grandfather was a royal duke,
and he himself has been to Eton and Oxford. His brain is as cunning as
his fingers, and though we meet signs of him at every turn, we never
know where to find the man himself. He'll crack a crib in Scotland one
week, and be raising money to build an orphanage in Cornwall the next.
I've been on his track for years, and have never set eyes on him yet."

"I hope that I may have the pleasure of introducing you to-night. I've
had one or two little turns also with Mr. John Clay, and I agree with
you that he is at the head of his profession. It is past ten, however,
and quite time that we started. If you two will take the first hansom,
Watson and I will follow in the second."

Sherlock Holmes was not very communicative during the long drive, and
lay back in the cab humming the tunes which he had heard in the
afternoon. We rattled through an endless labyrinth of gas-lit streets
until we emerged into Farringdon Street.

"We are close there now," my friend remarked. "This fellow Merryweather
is a bank director, and personally interested in the matter. I thought
it as well to have Jones with us also. He is not a bad fellow, though
an absolute imbecile in his profession. He has one positive virtue. He
is as brave as a bulldog, and as tenacious as a lobster if he gets his
claws upon any one. Here we are, and they are waiting for us."

We had reached the same crowded thoroughfare in which we had found
ourselves in the morning. Our cabs were dismissed, and, following the
guidance of Mr. Merryweather, we passed down a narrow passage and
through a side door, which he opened for us. Within there was a small
corridor, which ended in a very massive iron gate. This also was
opened, and led down a flight of winding stone steps, which terminated
at another formidable gate. Mr. Merryweather stopped to light a
lantern, and then conducted us down a dark, earth-smelling passage, and
so, after opening a third door, into a huge vault or cellar, which was
piled all round with crates and massive boxes.

"You are not very vulnerable from above," Holmes remarked, as he held
up the lantern and gazed about him.

"Nor from below," said Mr. Merryweather, striking his stick upon the
flags which lined the floor. "Why, dear me, it sounds quite hollow!" he
remarked, looking up in surprise.

"I must really ask you to be a little more quiet," said Holmes,
severely. "You have already imperilled the whole success of our
expedition. Might I beg that you would have the goodness to sit down
upon one of those boxes, and not to interfere?"

The solemn Mr. Merryweather perched himself upon a crate, with a very
injured expression upon his face, while Holmes fell upon his knees upon
the floor, and, with the lantern and a magnifying lens, began to
examine minutely the cracks between the stones. A few seconds sufficed
to satisfy him, for he sprang to his feet again, and put his glass in
his pocket.

"We have at least an hour before us," he remarked; "for they can hardly
take any steps until the good pawnbroker is safely in bed. Then they
will not lose a minute, for the sooner they do their work the longer
time they will have for their escape. We are at present, doctor--as no
doubt you have divined--in the cellar of the city branch of one of the
principal London banks. Mr. Merryweather is the chairman of directors,
and he will explain to you that there are reasons why the more daring
criminals of London should take a considerable interest in this cellar
at present."

"It is our French gold," whispered the director. "We have had several
warnings that an attempt might be made upon it."

"Your French gold?"

"Yes. We had occasion some months ago to strengthen our resources, and
borrowed, for that purpose, 30,000 napoleons[230-1] from the Bank of
France. It has become known that we have never had occasion to unpack
the money, and that it is still lying in our cellar. The crate upon
which I sit contains 2000 napoleons packed between layers of lead foil.
Our reserve of bullion is much larger at present than is usually kept
in a single branch office, and the directors have had misgivings upon
the subject."

"Which were very well justified," observed Holmes. "And now it is time
that we arranged our little plans. I expect that within an hour matters
will come to a head. In the meantime, Mr. Merryweather, we must put the
screen over that dark lantern."

"And sit in the dark?"

"I am afraid so. I had brought a pack of cards in my pocket, and I
thought that, as we were a _partie carree_,[231-1] you might have your
rubber after all. But I see that the enemy's preparations have gone so
far that we cannot risk the presence of a light. And, first of all, we
must choose our positions. These are daring men, and though we shall
take them at a disadvantage, they may do us some harm unless we are
careful. I shall stand behind this crate, and do you conceal yourselves
behind those. Then, when I flash a light upon them, close in swiftly.
If they fire, Watson, have no compunction about shooting them down."

I placed my revolver, cocked, upon the top of the wooden case behind
which I crouched. Holmes shot the slide across the front of his
lantern, and left us in pitch darkness--such an absolute darkness as I
have never before experienced. The smell of hot metal remained to
assure us that the light was still there, ready to flash out at a
moment's notice. To me, with my nerves worked up to a pitch of
expectancy, there was something depressing and subduing in the sudden
gloom, and in the cold, dank air of the vault.

"They have but one retreat," whispered Holmes. "That is back through
the house into Saxe-Coburg Square. I hope that you have done what I
asked you, Jones?"

"I have an inspector and two officers waiting at the front door."

"Then we have stopped all the holes. And now we must be silent and
wait."

What a time it seemed! From comparing notes afterwards it was but an
hour and a quarter, yet it appeared to me that the night must have
almost gone, and the dawn be breaking above us. My limbs were weary and
stiff, for I feared to change my position; yet my nerves were worked up
to the highest pitch of tension, and my hearing was so acute that I
could not only hear the gentle breathing of my companions, but I could
distinguish the deeper, heavier in-breath of the bulky Jones from the
thin, sighing note of the bank director. From my position I could look
over the case in the direction of the floor. Suddenly my eyes caught
the glint of a light.

At first it was but a lurid spark upon the stone pavement. Then it
lengthened out until it became a yellow line, and then, without any
warning or sound, a gash seemed to open and a hand appeared; a white,
almost womanly hand, which felt about in the center of the little area
of light. For a minute or more the hand, with its writhing fingers,
protruded out of the floor. Then it was withdrawn as suddenly as it
appeared, and all was dark again save the single lurid spark which
marked a chink between the stones.

Its disappearance, however, was but momentary. With a rending, tearing
sound, one of the broad, white stones turned over upon its side, and
left a square, gaping hole, through which streamed the light of a
lantern. Over the edge there peeped a clean-cut, boyish face, which
looked keenly about it, and then, with a hand on either side of the
aperture, the figure drew itself shoulder-high and waist-high, until
one knee rested upon the edge. In another instant he stood at the side
of the hole, and was hauling after him a companion, lithe and small
like himself, with a pale face and a shock of very red hair.

"It's all clear," he whispered. "Have you the chisel and the bags?
Great Scott! Jump, Archie, jump, and I'll swing for it!"

Sherlock Holmes had sprung out and seized the intruder by the collar.
The other dived down the hole, and I heard the sound of rending cloth
as Jones clutched at his skirts. The light flashed down upon the barrel
of a revolver, but Holmes's hunting crop came down on the man's wrist,
and the pistol clinked upon the stone floor.

"It's no use, John Clay," said Holmes, blandly. "You have no chance at
all."

"So I see," the other answered, with the utmost coolness. "I fancy that
my pal is all right, though I see you have got his coat-tails."

"There are three men waiting for him at the door," said Holmes.

"Oh, indeed! You seem to have done the thing very completely. I must
compliment you."

"And I you," Holmes answered. "Your red-headed idea was very new and
effective."

"You'll see your pal again presently," said Jones. "He's quicker at
climbing down holes than I am. Just hold out while I fix the derbies."

"I beg that you will not touch me with your filthy hands," remarked our
prisoner, as the handcuffs clattered upon his wrists. "You may not be
aware that I have royal blood in my veins. Have the goodness, also,
when you address me always to say 'sir' and 'please.'"

"All right," said Jones, with a stare and a snigger. "Well, would you
please, sir, march up-stairs, where we can get a cab to carry your
highness to the police-station?"

"That is better," said John Clay, serenely. He made a sweeping bow to
the three of us, and walked quietly off in the custody of the
detective.

"Really Mr. Holmes," said Mr. Merryweather, as we followed them from
the cellar, "I do not know how the bank can thank you or repay you.
There is no doubt that you have detected and defeated in the most
complete manner one of the most determined attempts at bank robbery
that have ever come within my experience."

"I have had one or two little scores of my own to settle with Mr. John
Clay," said Holmes. "I have been at some small expense over this
matter, which I shall expect the bank to refund, but beyond that I am
amply repaid by having had an experience which is in many ways unique,
and by hearing the very remarkable narrative of the Red-headed League."

                    *     *     *     *     *

"You see, Watson," he explained, in the early hours of the morning, as
we sat over a glass of whiskey-and-soda in Baker Street, "it was
perfectly obvious from the first that the only possible object of this
rather fantastic business of the advertisement of the League, and the
copying of the 'Encyclopaedia,' must be to get this not over-bright
pawnbroker out of the way for a number of hours every day. It was a
curious way of managing it, but, really, it would be difficult to
suggest a better. The method was no doubt suggested to Clay's ingenious
mind by the color of his accomplice's hair. The L4 a week was a lure
which must draw him, and what was it to them, who were playing for
thousands? They put in the advertisement, one rogue has the temporary
office, the other rogue incites the man to apply for it, and together
they manage to secure his absence every morning in the week. From the
time that I heard of the assistant having come for half wages, it was
obvious to me that he had some strong motive for securing the
situation."

"But how could you guess what the motive was?"

"Had there been women in the house, I should have suspected a mere
vulgar intrigue. That, however, was out of the question. The man's
business was a small one, and there was nothing in his house which
could account for such elaborate preparations, and such an expenditure
as they were at. It must, then, be something out of the house. What
could it be? I thought of the assistant's fondness for photography, and
his trick of vanishing into the cellar. The cellar! There was the end
of this tangled clue. Then I made inquiries as to this mysterious
assistant, and found that I had to deal with one of the coolest and
most daring criminals in London. He was doing something in the
cellar--something which took many hours a day for months on end. What
could it be, once more? I could think of nothing save that he was
running a tunnel to some other building.

"So far I had got when we went to visit the scene of action. I
surprised you by beating upon the pavement with my stick. I was
ascertaining whether the cellar stretched out in front or behind. It
was not in front. Then I rang the bell, and, as I hoped, the assistant
answered it. We have had some skirmishes, but we had never set eyes
upon each other before. I hardly looked at his face. His knees were
what I wished to see. You must yourself have remarked how worn,
wrinkled, and stained they were. They spoke of those hours of
burrowing. The only remaining point was what they were burrowing for. I
walked round the corner, saw the City and Suburban Bank abutted on our
friend's premises, and felt that I had solved my problem. When you
drove home after the concert I called upon Scotland Yard, and upon the
chairman of the bank directors, with the result that you have seen."

"And how could you tell that they would make their attempt to-night?" I
asked.

"Well, when they closed their League offices that was a sign that they
cared no longer about Mr. Jabez Wilson's presence--in other words, that
they had completed their tunnel. But it was essential that they should
use it soon, as it might be discovered, or the bullion might be
removed. Saturday would suit them better than any other day, as it
would give them two days for their escape. For all these reasons I
expected them to come to-night."

"You reasoned it out beautifully," I exclaimed, in unfeigned
admiration. "It is so long a chain, and yet every link rings true."

"It saved me from ennui," he answered, yawning. "Alas! I already feel
it closing in upon me. My life is spent in one long effort to escape
from the common-places of existence. These little problems help me to
do so."

"And you are a benefactor of the race," said I.

He shrugged his shoulders. "Well, perhaps, after all, it is of some
little use," he remarked. "'_L'homme c'est rien _--_l'oeuvre c'est
tout_,'[237-1] as Gustave Flaubert wrote to Georges Sand."




JAMES MATTHEW BARRIE

The Inconsiderate Waiter


Frequently I have to ask myself in the street for the name of the man I
bowed to just now, and then, before I can answer, the wind of the first
corner blows him from my memory. I have a theory, however, that those
puzzling faces, which pass before I can see who cut the coat, all
belong to club-waiters.

Until William forced his affairs upon me, that was all I did know of
the private life of waiters, though I have been in the club for twenty
years. I was even unaware whether they slept down-stairs or had their
own homes, nor had I the interest to inquire of other members, nor they
the knowledge to inform me. I hold that this sort of people should be
fed and clothed and given airing and wives and children, and I
subscribe yearly, I believe, for these purposes; but to come into
closer relation with waiters is bad form; they are club fittings, and
William should have kept his distress to himself or taken it away and
patched it up, like a rent in one of the chairs. His inconsiderateness
has been a pair of spectacles to me for months.

It is not correct taste to know the name of a club-waiter, so that I
must apologize for knowing William's and still more for not forgetting
it. If, again, to speak of a waiter is bad form, to speak bitterly is
the comic degree of it. But William has disappointed me sorely. There
were years when I would defer dining several minutes that he might wait
on me. His pains to reserve the window-seat for me were perfectly
satisfactory. I allowed him privileges, as to suggest dishes, and would
give him information, as that someone had startled me in the
reading-room by slamming a door. I have shown him how I cut my finger
with a piece of string. Obviously he was gratified by these attentions,
usually recommending a liqueur; and I fancy he must have understood my
sufferings, for he often looked ill himself. Probably he was rheumatic,
but I cannot say for certain, as I never thought of asking, and he had
the sense to see that the knowledge would be offensive to me.

In the smoking-room we have a waiter so independent that once, when he
brought me a yellow Chartreuse,[239-1] and I said I had ordered green,
he replied, "No, sir, you said yellow." William could never have been
guilty of such effrontery. In appearance, of course, he is mean, but I
can no more describe him than a milkmaid could draw cows. I suppose we
distinguish one waiter from another much as we pick our hat from the
rack. We could have plotted a murder safely before William. He never
presumed to have opinions of his own. When such was my mood he remained
silent, and if I announced that something diverting had happened to me
he laughed before I told him what it was. He turned the twinkle in his
eye off or on at my bidding as readily as if it was the gas. To my
"Sure to be wet to-morrow," he would reply, "Yes, sir;" and to
Trelawney's "It doesn't look like rain," two minutes afterward, he
would reply, "No, sir." It was one member who said Lightning Rod would
win the Derby[240-1] and another who said Lightning Rod had no chance,
but it was William who agreed with both. He was like a cheroot, which
may be smoked from either end. So used was I to him that, had he died
or got another situation (or whatever it is such persons do when they
disappear from the club), I should probably have told the head waiter
to bring him back, as I disliked changes.

It would not become me to know precisely when I began to think William
an ingrate, but I date his lapse from the evening when he brought me
oysters. I detest oysters, and no one knew it better than William. He
has agreed with me that he could not understand any gentleman's liking
them. Between me and a certain member who smacks his lips twelve times
to a dozen of them, William knew I liked a screen to be placed until we
had reached the soup, and yet he gave me the oysters and the other man
my sardine. Both the other member and I called quickly for brandy and
the head waiter. To do William justice, he shook, but never can I
forget his audacious explanation, "Beg pardon, sir, but I was thinking
of something else."

In these words William had flung off the mask, and now I knew him for
what he was.

I must not be accused of bad form for looking at William on the
following evening. What prompted me to do so was not personal interest
in him, but a desire to see whether I dare let him wait on me again.
So, recalling that a castor was off a chair yesterday, one is entitled
to make sure that it is on to-day before sitting down. If the
expression is not too strong, I may say that I was taken aback by
William's manner. Even when crossing the room to take my orders he let
his one hand play nervously with the other. I had to repeat "Sardine on
toast" twice, and instead of answering "Yes, sir," as if my selection
of sardine on toast was a personal gratification to him, which is the
manner one expects of a waiter, he glanced at the clock, then out at
the window, and, starting, asked, "Did you say sardine on toast, sir?"

It was the height of summer, when London smells like a chemist's shop,
and he who has the dinner-table at the window needs no candles to show
him his knife and fork. I lay back at intervals, now watching a
starved-looking woman asleep on a door-step, and again complaining of
the club bananas. By and by, I saw a little girl of the commonest kind,
ill-clad and dirty, as all these arabs are. Their parents should be
compelled to feed and clothe them comfortably, or at least to keep them
indoors, where they cannot offend our eyes. Such children are for
pushing aside with one's umbrella; but this girl I noticed because she
was gazing at the club windows. She had stood thus for perhaps ten
minutes, when I became aware that some one was leaning over me, to look
out at the window. I turned round. Conceive my indignation on seeing
that the rude person was William.

"How dare you, William?" I said, sternly. He seemed not to hear me. Let
me tell, in the measured words of one describing a past incident, what
then took place. To get nearer the window, he pressed heavily on my
shoulder.

"William, you forget yourself!" I said, meaning--as I see now--that he
had forgotten me.

I heard him gulp, but not to my reprimand. He was scanning the street.
His hands chattered on my shoulders, and, pushing him from me, I saw
that his mouth was agape.

"What are you looking for?" I asked.

He stared at me, and then, like one who had at last heard the echo of
my question, seemed to be brought back to the club. He turned his face
from me for an instant, and answered, shakily:

"I beg your pardon, sir! I--I shouldn't have done it. Are the bananas
too ripe, sir?"

He recommended the nuts, and awaited my verdict so anxiously while I
ate one that I was about to speak graciously, when I again saw his eyes
drag him to the window.

"William," I said, my patience giving way at last; "I dislike being
waited on by a melancholy waiter."

"Yes, sir," he replied, trying to smile, and then broke out
passionately, "For God's sake, sir, tell me, have you seen a little
girl looking in at the club windows?"

He had been a good waiter once, and his distracted visage was spoiling
my dinner.

"There," I said, pointing to the girl, and no doubt would have added
that he must bring me coffee immediately, had he continued to listen.
But already he was beckoning to the child. I had not the least interest
in her (indeed it had never struck me that waiters had private affairs,
and I still think it a pity that they should have); but as I happened
to be looking out at the window I could not avoid seeing what occurred.
As soon as the girl saw William she ran into the middle of the street,
regardless of vehicles, and nodded three times to him. Then she
disappeared.

I have said that she was quite a common child, without attraction of
any sort, and yet it was amazing the difference she made in William. He
gasped relief, like one who has broken through the anxiety that checks
breathing, and into his face there came a silly laugh of happiness. I
had dined well, on the whole, so I said:

"I am glad to see you cheerful again, William."

I meant that I approved his cheerfulness, because it helped my
digestion, but he must needs think I was sympathizing with him.

"Thank you, sir," he answered. "Oh, sir! when she nodded and I saw it
was all right, I could have gone down on my knees to God."

I was as much horrified as if he had dropped a plate on my toes. Even
William, disgracefully emotional as he was at the moment, flung out his
arms to recall the shameful words.

"Coffee, William!" I said, sharply.

I sipped my coffee indignantly, for it was plain to me that William had
something on his mind.

"You are not vexed with me, sir?" he had the hardihood to whisper.

"It was a liberty," I said.

"I know, sir; but I was beside myself."

"That was a liberty also."

He hesitated, and then blurted out:

"It is my wife, sir. She----"

I stopped him with my hand. William, whom I had favored in so many
ways, was a married man! I might have guessed as much years before had
I ever reflected about waiters, for I knew vaguely that his class did
this sort of thing. His confession was distasteful to me, and I said,
warningly:

"Remember where you are, William."

"Yes, sir; but, you see, she is so delicate----"

"Delicate! I forbid your speaking to me on unpleasant topics."

"Yes, sir; begging your pardon."

It was characteristic of William to beg my pardon and withdraw his wife
like some unsuccessful dish, as if its taste would not remain in the
mouth. I shall be chided for questioning him further about his wife,
but, though doubtless an unusual step, it was only bad form
superficially, for my motive was irreproachable. I inquired for his
wife, not because I was interested in her welfare, but in the hope of
allaying my irritation. So I am entitled to invite the wayfarer who has
bespattered me with mud to scrape it off.

I desired to be told by William that the girl's signals meant his
wife's recovery to health. He should have seen that such was my wish
and answered accordingly. But, with the brutal inconsiderateness of his
class, he said:

"She has had a good day, but the doctor, he--the doctor is afeard she
is dying."

Already I repented my question. William and his wife seemed in league
against me, when they might so easily have chosen some other member.

"Pooh the doctor," I said.

"Yes, sir," he answered.

"Have you been married long, William?"

"Eight years, sir. Eight years ago she was--I--I mind her when--and now
the doctor says----"

The fellow gaped at me. "More coffee, sir?" he asked.

"What is her ailment?"

"She was always one of the delicate kind, but full of spirit, and--and
you see she has had a baby lately----"

"William!"

"And she--I--the doctor is afeard she's not picking up."

"I feel sure she will pick up."

"Yes, sir?"

It must have been the wine I had drunk that made me tell him:

"I was once married, William. My wife--it was just such a case as
yours."

"She did not get better, sir?"

"No."

After a pause, he said, "Thank you, sir," meaning for the sympathy that
made me tell him that. But it must have been the wine.

"That little girl comes here with a message from your wife?"

"Yes; if she nods three times, it means my wife is a little better."

"She nodded thrice to-day."

"But she is told to do that to relieve me, and maybe those nods don't
tell the truth."

"Is she your girl?"

"No, we have none but the baby. She is a neighbor's. She comes twice a
day."

"It is heartless of her parents not to send her every hour."

"But she is six years old," he said, "and has a house and two sisters
to look after in the daytime, and a dinner to cook. Gentlefolk don't
understand."

"I suppose you live in some low part, William."

"Off Drury Lane," he answered, flushing; "but--but it isn't low. You
see, we were never used to anything better, and I mind, when I let her
see the house before we were married, she--she a sort of cried, because
she was so proud of it. That was eight years ago, and now,--she's
afeard she'll die when I'm away at my work."

"Did she tell you that?"

"Never. She always says she is feeling a little stronger."

"Then how can you know she is afraid of that?"

"I don't know how I know, sir, but when I am leaving the house in the
morning I look at her from the door, and she looks at me, and then I--I
know."

"A green Chartreuse, William!"

I tried to forget William's vulgar story in billiards, but he had
spoiled my game. My opponent, to whom I can give twenty, ran out when I
was sixty-seven, and I put aside my cue pettishly. That in itself was
bad form, but what would they have thought had they known that a
waiter's impertinence caused it! I grew angrier with William as the
night wore on, and next day I punished him by giving my orders through
another waiter.

As I had my window seat, I could not but see that the girl was late
again. Somehow I dawdled over my coffee. I had an evening paper before
me, but there was so little in it that my eyes found more of interest
in the street. It did not matter to me whether William's wife died, but
when that girl had promised to come, why did she not come? These lower
classes only give their word to break it. The coffee was undrinkable.

At last I saw her. William was at another window, pretending to do
something with the curtains. I stood up, pressing closer to the window.
The coffee had been so bad that I felt shaky. She nodded three times
and smiled.

"She is a little better," William whispered to me, almost gayly.

"Whom are you speaking of?" I asked, coldly, and immediately retired to
the billiard-room, where I played a capital game. The coffee was much
better there than in the dining-room.

Several days passed, and I took care to show William that I had
forgotten his maunderings. I chanced to see the little girl (though I
never looked for her) every evening and she always nodded three times,
save once, when she shook her head, and then William's face grew white
as a napkin. I remember this incident because that night I could not
get into a pocket. So badly did I play that the thought of it kept me
awake in bed, and that, again, made me wonder how William's wife was.
Next day I went to the club early (which was not my custom) to see the
new books. Being in the club at any rate, I looked into the dining-room
to ask William if I had left my gloves there, and the sight of him
reminded me of his wife, so I asked for her. He shook his head
mournfully, and I went off in a rage.

So accustomed am I to the club, that when I dine elsewhere I feel
uncomfortable next morning, as if I had missed a dinner. William knew
this; yet here he was, hounding me out of the club! That evening I
dined (as the saying is) at a restaurant, where no sauce was served
with the asparagus. Furthermore, as if that were not triumph enough for
William, his doleful face came between me and every dish, and I seemed
to see his wife dying to annoy me.

I dined next day at the club, for self-preservation, taking, however, a
table in the middle of the room, and engaging a waiter who had once
nearly poisoned me by not interfering when I put two lumps of sugar
into my coffee instead of one, which is my allowance. But no William
came to me to acknowledge his humiliation, and by and by I became aware
that he was not in the room. Suddenly the thought struck me that his
wife must be dead, and I----. It was the worst-cooked and the
worst-served dinner I ever had in the club.

I tried the smoking-room. Usually the talk there is entertaining; but
on that occasion it was so frivolous that I did not remain five
minutes. In the card-room a member told me, excitedly, that a policeman
had spoken rudely to him; and my strange comment was:

"After all, it is a small matter."

In the library, where I had not been for years, I found two members
asleep, and, to my surprise, William on a ladder dusting books.

"You have not heard, sir?" he said in answer to my raised eyebrows.
Descending the ladder he whispered, tragically:

"It was last evening, sir. I--I lost my head and I--swore at a member."

I stepped back from William, and glanced apprehensively at the two
members. They still slept.

"I hardly knew," William went on, "what I was doing all day yesterday,
for I had left my wife so weakly that----"

I stamped my foot.

"I beg your pardon for speaking of her," he had the grace to say, "but
I couldn't help slipping to the window often yesterday to look for
Jenny, and when she did come and I saw she was crying, it--it a sort of
confused me, and I didn't know right, sir, what I was doing. I hit
against a member, Mr. Myddleton Finch, and he--he jumped and swore at
me. Well, sir, I had just touched him after all, and I was so
miserable, it a kind of stung me to be treated like--like that, and me
a man as well as him, and I lost my senses, and--and I swore back."

William's shamed head sank on his chest, but I even let pass his
insolence in likening himself to a member of the club, so afraid was I
of the sleepers waking and detecting me in talk with a waiter.

"For the love of God," William cried, with coarse emotion, "don't let
them dismiss me!"

"Speak lower!" I said. "Who sent you here?"

"I was turned out of the dining-room at once, and told to attend to the
library until they had decided what to do with me. Oh, sir, I'll lose
my place!"

He was blubbering, as if a change of waiters was a matter of
importance.

"This is very bad, William," I said. "I fear I can do nothing for you."

"Have mercy on a distracted man!" he entreated. "I'll go on my knees to
Mr. Myddleton Finch."

How could I but despise a fellow who would be thus abject for a pound a
week?

"I dare not tell her," he continued, "that I have lost my place. She
would just fall back and die."

"I forbade your speaking of your wife," I said, sharply, "unless you
can speak pleasantly of her."

"But she may be worse now, sir, and I cannot even see Jenny from here.
The library windows look to the back."

"If she dies," I said, "it will be a warning to you to marry a stronger
woman next time."

Now, every one knows that there is little real affection among the
lower orders. As soon as they have lost one mate they take another. Yet
William, forgetting our relative positions, drew himself up and raised
his fist, and if I had not stepped back I swear he would have struck
me.

The highly improper words William used I will omit, out of
consideration for him. Even while he was apologizing for them I retired
to the smoking-room, where I found the cigarettes so badly rolled that
they would not keep alight. After a little I remembered that I wanted
to see Myddleton Finch about an improved saddle of which a friend of
his has the patent. He was in the news-room, and having questioned him
about the saddle, I said:

"By the way, what is this story about your swearing at one of the
waiters?"

"You mean about his swearing at me," Myddleton Finch replied,
reddening.

"I am glad that was it," I said. "For I could not believe you guilty of
such bad form."

"If I did swear----" he was beginning, but I went on:

"The version which reached me was that you swore at him, and he
repeated the word. I heard he was to be dismissed and you reprimanded."

"Who told you that?" asked Myddleton Finch, who is a timid man.

"I forget; it is club talk," I replied lightly. "But of course the
committee will take your word. The waiter, whichever one he is, richly
deserves his dismissal for insulting you without provocation."

Then our talk returned to the saddle, but Myddleton Finch was
abstracted, and presently he said:

"Do you know, I fancy I was wrong in thinking that waiter swore at me,
and I'll withdraw my charge to-morrow."

Myddleton Finch then left me, and, sitting alone, I realized that I had
been doing William a service. To some slight extent I may have
intentionally helped him to retain his place in the club, and I now see
the reason, which was that he alone knows precisely to what extent I
like my claret heated.

For a mere second I remembered William's remark that he should not be
able to see the girl Jenny from the library windows. Then this
recollection drove from my head that I had only dined in the sense that
my dinner-bill was paid. Returning to the dining-room, I happened to
take my chair at the window, and while I was eating a devilled kidney I
saw in the street the girl whose nods had such an absurd effect on
William.

The children of the poor are as thoughtless as their parents, and this
Jenny did not sign to the windows in the hope that William might see
her, though she could not see him. Her face, which was disgracefully
dirty, bore doubt and dismay on it, but whether she brought good news
it would not tell. Somehow I had expected her to signal when she saw
me, and, though her message could not interest me, I was in the mood in
which one is irritated at that not taking place which he is awaiting.
Ultimately she seemed to be making up her mind to go away.

A boy was passing with the evening papers, and I hurried out to get
one, rather thoughtlessly, for we have all the papers in the club.
Unfortunately I misunderstood the direction the boy had taken; but
round the first corner (out of sight of the club windows) I saw the
girl Jenny, and so I asked her how William's wife was.

"Did he send you to me?" she replied, impertinently taking me for a
waiter. "My!" she added, after a second scrutiny, "I b'lieve you're one
of them. His missis is a bit better, and I was to tell him as she took
all the tapiocar."

"How could you tell him?" I asked.

"I was to do like this," she replied, and went through the supping of
something out of a plate in dumb show.

"That would not show she ate all the tapioca," I said.

"But I was to end like this," she answered, licking an imaginary plate
with her tongue. I gave her a shilling (to get rid of her), and
returned to the club disgusted.

Later in the evening I had to go to the club library for a book, and
while William was looking in vain for it (I had forgotten the title) I
said to him:

"By the way, William, Mr. Myddleton Finch is to tell the committee that
he was mistaken in the charge he brought against you, so you will
doubtless be restored to the dining-room to-morrow."

The two members were still in their chairs, probably sleeping lightly;
yet he had the effrontery to thank me.

"Don't thank me," I said, blushing at the imputation. "Remember your
place, William!"

"But Mr. Myddleton Finch knew I swore," he insisted.

"A gentleman," I replied, stiffly, "cannot remember for twenty-four
hours what a waiter has said to him."

"No, sir, but----"

To stop him I had to say:

"And, ah, William, your wife is a little better. She has eaten the
tapioca--all of it."

"How can you know, sir?"

"By an accident."

"Jenny signed to the window."

"No."

"Then you saw her, and went out, and----"

"Nonsense!"

"Oh, sir, to do that for me! May God bl----"

"William!"

"Forgive me, sir, but--when I tell my missis, she will say it was
thought of your own wife as made you do it."

He wrung my hand. I dared not withdraw it, lest we should waken the
sleepers.

William returned to the dining-room, and I had to show him that, if he
did not cease looking gratefully at me, I must change my waiter. I also
ordered him to stop telling me nightly how his wife was, but I
continued to know, as I could not help seeing the girl Jenny from the
window. Twice in a week I learned from this objectionable child that
the ailing woman had again eaten all the tapioca. Then I became
suspicious of William. I will tell why.

It began with a remark of Captain Upjohn's. We had been speaking of the
inconvenience of not being able to get a hot dish served after 1 A.M.,
and he said:

"It is because these lazy waiters would strike. If the beggars had a
love of their work, they would not rush away from the club the moment
one o'clock strikes. That glum fellow who often waits on you takes to
his heels the moment he is clear of the club steps. He ran into me the
other night at the top of the street, and was off without apologizing."

"You mean the foot of the street, Upjohn," I said, for such is the way
to Drury Lane.

"No; I mean the top. The man was running west."

"East."

"West."

I smiled, which so annoyed him that he bet me two to one in sovereigns.
The bet could have been decided most quickly by asking William a
question, but I thought, foolishly doubtless, that it might hurt his
feelings, so I watched him leave the club. The possibility of Upjohn's
winning the bet had seemed remote to me. Conceive my surprise,
therefore, when William went westward.

Amazed, I pursued him along two streets without realizing that I was
doing so. Then curiosity put me into a hansom. We followed William, and
it proved to be a three-shilling fare, for running when he was in
breath and walking when he was out of it, he took me to West
Kensington.

I discharged my cab, and from across the street watched William's
incomprehensible behavior. He had stopped at a dingy row of workmen's
houses, and knocked at the darkened window of one of them. Presently a
light showed. So far as I could see, someone pulled up the blind and
for ten minutes talked to William. I was uncertain whether they talked
for the window was not opened, and I felt that, had William spoken
through the glass loud enough to be heard inside, I must have heard him
too. Yet he nodded and beckoned. I was still bewildered when, by
setting off the way he had come, he gave me the opportunity of going
home.

Knowing from the talk of the club what the lower orders are, could I
doubt that this was some discreditable love affair of William's? His
solicitude for his wife had been mere pretence; so far as it was
genuine, it meant that he feared she might recover. He probably told
her that he was detained nightly in the club till three.

I was miserable next day and blamed the devilled kidneys for it.
Whether William was unfaithful to his wife was nothing to me, but I had
two plain reasons for insisting on his going straight home from his
club: the one, that, as he had made me lose a bet, I would punish him;
the other, that he could wait upon me better if he went to bed betimes.

Yet I did not question him. There was something in his face that----.
Well, I seemed to see his dying wife in it.

I was so out of sorts that I could eat no dinner. I left the club.
Happening to stand for some time at the foot of the street, I chanced
to see the girl Jenny coming, and----. No; let me tell the truth,
though the whole club reads; I was waiting for her.

"How is William's wife to-day?" I asked.

"She told me to nod three times," the little slattern replied; "but she
looked like nothink but a dead one till she got the brandy."

"Hush, child!" I said, shocked. "You don't know how the dead look."

"Bless yer," she answered, "don't I just! Why, I've helped to lay 'em
out. I'm going on seven."

"Is William good to his wife?"

"Course he is. Ain't she his missis?"

"Why should that make him good to her?" I asked cynically, out of my
knowledge of the poor. But the girl, precocious in many ways, had never
had my opportunities of studying the lower classes in the newspapers,
fiction, and club talk. She shut one eye, and looking up wonderingly,
said:

"Ain't you green--just!"

"When does William reach home at night?"

"'Tain't night; it's morning. When I wakes up at half dark and half
light and hears a door shutting I know as it's either father going off
to his work or Mr. Hicking coming home from his."

"Who is Mr. Hicking?"

"Him as we've been speaking on--William. We calls him mister, 'cause
he's a toff. Father's just doing jobs in Covent Garden, but Mr.
Hicking, he's a waiter, and a clean shirt every day. The old woman
would like father to be a waiter, but he hain't got the 'ristocratic
look."

"What old woman?"

"Go 'long! that's my mother. Is it true there's a waiter in the club
just for to open the door?"

"Yes, but----"

"And another just for to lick the stamps? My!"

"William leaves the club at one o'clock?" I said, interrogatively.

She nodded. "My mother," she said, "is one to talk, and she says to Mr.
Hicking as he should get away at twelve, 'cause his missis needs him
more'n the gentlemen need him. The old woman do talk."

"And what does William answer to that?"

"He says as the gentlemen can't be kept waiting for their cheese."

"But William does not go straight home when he leaves the club?"

"That's the kid."

"Kid!" I echoed, scarcely understanding, for knowing how little the
poor love their children, I had asked William no questions about the
baby.

"Didn't you know his missis had a kid?"

"Yes, but that is no excuse for William's staying away from his sick
wife," I answered, sharply. A baby in such a home as William's, I
reflected, must be trying, but still----. Besides his class can sleep
through any din.

"The kid ain't in our court," the girl explained. "He's in W., he is,
and I've never been out of W.C., leastwise, not as I knows on."

"This is W. I suppose you mean that the child is at West Kensington?
Well, no doubt it was better for William's wife to get rid of the
child----"

"Better!" interposed the girl. "'Tain't better for her not to have the
kid. Ain't her not having him what she's always thinking on when she
looks like a dead one."

"How could you know that?"

"'Cause," answered the girl, illustrating her words with a gesture, "I
watches her, and I sees her arms going this way, just like as she
wanted to hug her kid."

"Possibly you are right," I said, frowning, "but William has put the
child out to nurse because it disturbed his night's rest. A man who has
his work to do----"

"You are green!"

"Then why have the mother and child been separated?"

"Along of that there measles. Near all the young 'uns in our court has
'em bad."

"Have you had them?"

"I said the young 'uns."

"And William sent the baby to West Kensington to escape infection?"

"Took him, he did."

"Against his wife's wishes?"

"Na-o!"

"You said she was dying for want of the child?"

"Wouldn't she rayther die than have the kid die?"

"Don't speak so heartlessly, child. Why does William not go straight
home from the club? Does he go to West Kensington to see it?"

"'Tain't a hit, it's an 'e. 'Course he do."

"Then he should not. His wife has the first claim on him."

"Ain't you green! It's his missis as wants him to go. Do you think she
could sleep till she knowed how the kid was?"

"But he does not go into the house at West Kensington?"

"Is he soft? Course he don't go in, fear of taking the infection to the
kid. They just holds the kid up at the window to him, so as he can have
a good look. Then he comes home and tells his missis. He sits foot of
the bed and tells."

"And that takes place every night? He can't have much to tell."

"He has just."

"He can only say whether the child is well or ill."

"My! He tells what a difference there is in the kid since he see'd him
last."

"There can be no difference!"

"Go 'long! Ain't a kid always growing? Haven't Mr. Hicking to tell how
the hair is getting darker, and heaps of things beside?"

"Such as what?"

"Like whether he larfed, and if he has her nose, and how as he knowed
him. He tells her them things more'n once."

"And all this time he is sitting at the foot of the bed?"

"'Cept when he holds her hand."

"But when does he get to bed himself?"

"He don't get much. He tells her as he has a sleep at the club."

"He cannot say that."

"Hain't I heard him? But he do go to his bed a bit, and then they both
lies quiet, her pretending she is sleeping so as he can sleep, and him
feared to sleep case he shouldn't wake up to give her the bottle
stuff."

"What does the doctor say about her?"

"He's a good one, the doctor. Sometimes he says she would get better if
she could see the kid through the window."

"Nonsense!"

"And if she was took to the country."

"Then why does not William take her?"

"My! you are green! And if she drank port wines."

"Doesn't she?"

"No; but William he tells her about the gentlemen drinking them."

On the tenth day after my conversation with this unattractive child I
was in my brougham, with the windows up, and I sat back, a paper before
my face lest any one should look in. Naturally I was afraid of being
seen in company of William's wife and Jenny, for men about town are
uncharitable, and, despite the explanation I had ready, might have
charged me with pitying William. As a matter of fact, William was
sending his wife into Surrey to stay with an old nurse of mine, and I
was driving her down because my horses needed an outing. Besides, I was
going that way, at any rate.

I had arranged that the girl Jenny, who was wearing an outrageous
bonnet, should accompany us, because, knowing the greed of her class, I
feared she might blackmail me at the club.

William joined us in the suburbs, bringing the baby with him, as I had
foreseen they would all be occupied with it, and to save me the trouble
of conversing with them. Mrs. Hicking I found too pale and fragile for
a workingman's wife, and I formed a mean opinion of her intelligence
from her pride in the baby, which was a very ordinary one. She created
quite a vulgar scene when it was brought to her, though she had given
me her word not to do so; what irritated me, even more than her tears,
being her ill-bred apology that she "had been 'feared baby wouldn't
know her again." I would have told her they didn't know anyone for
years had I not been afraid of the girl Jenny, who dandled the infant
on her knees and talked to it as if it understood. She kept me on
tenterhooks by asking it offensive questions: such as, "Oo know who
give me that bonnet?" and answering them herself, "It was the pretty
gentleman there," and several times I had to affect sleep because she
announced, "Kiddy wants to kiss the pretty gentleman."

Irksome as all this necessarily was to a man of taste, I suffered even
more when we reached our destination. As we drove through the village
the girl Jenny uttered shrieks of delight at the sight of flowers
growing up the cottage walls, and declared they were "just like
music-'all without the drink license." As my horses required a rest, I
was forced to abandon my intention of dropping these persons at their
lodgings and returning to town at once, and I could not go to the inn
lest I should meet inquisitive acquaintances. Disagreeable
circumstances, therefore, compelled me to take tea with a waiter's
family--close to a window, too, through which I could see the girl
Jenny talking excitedly to villagers, and telling them, I felt certain,
that I had been good to William. I had a desire to go out and put
myself right with those people.

William's long connection with the club should have given him some
manners, but apparently his class cannot take them on, for, though he
knew I regarded his thanks as an insult, he looked them when he was not
speaking them, and hardly had he sat down, by my orders, than he
remembered that I was a member of the club, and jumped up. Nothing is
in worse form than whispering, yet again and again, when he thought I
was not listening, he whispered to Mrs. Hicking, "You don't feel
faint?" or "How are you now?" He was also in extravagant glee because
she ate two cakes (it takes so little to put these people in good
spirits), and when she said she felt like another being already, the
fellow's face charged me with the change. I could not but conclude,
from the way Mrs. Hicking let the baby pound her, that she was stronger
than she had pretended.

I remained longer than was necessary, because I had something to say to
William which I knew he would misunderstand, and so I put off saying
it. But when he announced that it was time for him to return to London,
at which his wife suddenly paled, so that he had to sign to her not to
break down, I delivered the message.

"William," I said, "the head waiter asked me to say that you could take
a fortnight's holiday just now. Your wages will be paid as usual."

Confound them! William had me by the hand, and his wife was in tears
before I could reach the door.

"Is it your doing again, sir?" William cried.

"William!" I said, fiercely.

"We owe everything to you," he insisted. "The port wine----"

"Because I had no room for it in my cellar."

"The money for the nurse in London----"

"Because I objected to being waited on by a man who got no sleep."

"These lodgings----"

"Because I wanted to do something for my old nurse."

"And, now, sir, a fortnight's holiday!"

"Good-by, William!" I said, in a fury.

But before I could get away, Mrs. Hicking signed to William to leave
the room, and then she kissed my hand. She said something to me. It was
about my wife. Somehow I---- What business had William to tell her
about my wife?

They are all back in Drury Lane now, and William tells me that his wife
sings at her work just as she did eight years ago. I have no interest
in this, and try to check his talk of it; but such people have no sense
of propriety, and he even speaks of the girl Jenny, who sent me lately
a gaudy pair of worsted gloves worked by her own hand. The meanest
advantage they took of my weakness, however, was in calling their baby
after me. I have an uncomfortable suspicion, too, that William has
given the other waiters his version of the affair, but I feel safe so
long as it does not reach the committee.




ALPHONSE DAUDET

The Siege of Berlin[266-1]


We were walking up the Avenue des Champs-Elysees with Dr. V----, trying
to read the story of the siege of Paris in the shell-scarred walls and
the sidewalks plowed up by grape-shot. Just before we reached the
Circle, the doctor stopped and, pointing out to me one of the big
corner houses so pompously grouped around the Arc de Triomphe,[266-2]
told me this story.

You see those four closed windows above the balcony? During the first
day of August, that terrible August of last year, so full of storms and
disaster, I was called there to attend a very severe case of apoplexy.
The patient was Colonel Jouve, once a cuirassier of the First
Empire,[266-3] and now an old gentleman mad about glory and patriotism.
At the outbreak of war he had gone to live in the Champs-Elysees, in an
apartment with a balcony. Can you guess why? That he might be present
at the triumphant return of our troops. Poor old boy! The news of
Wissemburg reached him just as he was leaving the table. When he read
the name of Napoleon at the foot of that bulletin of defeat, he had a
stroke and fell.

I found the old cuirassier stretched out on the carpet with his face
bleeding and motionless as if struck by a heavy blow. If he had been
standing, he would have seemed a tall man. Stretched out as he was, he
seemed immense. He had a fine face, magnificent teeth, a thick head of
curly white hair, and though eighty years old did not look more than
sixty. Near him his granddaughter knelt weeping. There was a strong
family resemblance between them. Seeing them side by side, you thought
of two beautiful Greek medals struck from the same matrix, but one old
and worn and the other bright and clear-cut with all the brilliancy and
smoothness of a first impression.

I found the child's grief very touching. Daughter and granddaughter of
a soldier (her father was on Mac Mahon's[267-1] staff), the sight of
this splendid old man stretched out before her had suggested to her
another scene, no less terrible. I did all I could to reassure her, but
in my own mind I was not any too hopeful. There was no question that
the stroke had been apoplectic, and that is the sort of thing from
which at eighty one does not recover. As it turned out, the sick man
remained in a state of coma for three days.

Meanwhile, the news of the battle of Reichshoffen reached Paris. You
will remember in what form that news reached us first. Until evening we
all believed that we had won a great victory, with 20,000 Prussians
killed and the Crown Prince captured. Through some miracle, some
magnetic current, an echo of this national rejoicing must have reached
the sufferer, deaf and speechless and unable to move though he was.
That evening when I went to his bedside, I found a different man. His
eye was clear, his tongue was no longer thick, and he had strength
enough to smile at me and to stammer, "Vic-to-ry!"

"Yes, Colonel, a great victory!"

And the more details I gave him of Mac Mahon's brilliant success, the
more his face relaxed and brightened.

As I left, I found the little girl waiting for me outside the door. She
was pale and was crying.

"But he is going to get well," I said, taking her hands in mine.

The poor child had hardly courage to answer me. The true story of the
battle of Reichshoffen had just appeared on the bulletin boards. Mac
Mahon was retreating and the army cut to pieces. Surprised and shocked,
our eyes met, she thinking of her father and I of my patient. Surely he
would succumb to this new blow; and yet what could we do? Leave him the
joy, the illusion that had brought him back to life? That meant keeping
him alive with lies.

"Very well, I will tell them," said the child, and quickly wiping away
her tears she went back to her grandfather's room with a smile on her
face.

It was not an easy task which she had set herself. For the first few
days she had no great difficulty. The old gentleman's head was very
weak and he was as easily deceived as a child, but as his strength came
back his mind became clearer. He wanted to be kept in touch with troop
movements and to have the War Department Bulletin read to him. It was
pathetic to see the little girl, night and day, bent over her map of
Germany, sticking in pins with little flags on them, and trying hard to
invent to the last detail a successful campaign: Bazaine advancing on
Berlin, Frossard penetrating Bavaria, and Mac Mahon reaching the
Baltic.

To work this all out she needed help, and I helped her as much as I
could. But the one who helped her most was her grandfather himself. He
had conquered Germany so many times during the First Empire, he knew
every move. "This will be the enemy's next move, here," he would say,
"and ours will be this." His anticipations were always justified by the
event, which made him not a little proud.

Unhappily, no matter how fast we took cities and won battles, we never
went fast enough for him. The old fellow was insatiable. Each day as I
came in, I learned of some new success.

"Doctor, we have taken Mayence,"[269-1] said the little girl coming to
meet me with a smile that went to your heart, and through the door I
heard his glad salutation, "We're getting on! In another week we shall
be in Berlin."

At that time the Prussians were only a week's march from Paris. At
first we wondered whether we had not better carry our patient into the
country. Then we reflected that as soon as he was taken out of the
house, he would learn the true state of affairs, and I decided that he
was still too feeble, too stunned by his stroke, to let him find out
the truth. So we decided to stay where we were.

The first day of the Prussian occupation, I climbed the stairs to his
apartment, I remember, with a heavy heart at the thought of all the
closed doors of Paris and the fighting going on under her walls, in the
suburbs which were now on the frontier. I found the old gentleman
sitting up in bed jubilant and proud.

"Well," he said, "the siege has begun."

I looked at him in amazement. "So you know now, Colonel?"

His grandchild turned to me; "Why, yes, doctor. That is the great news
to-day. The siege of Berlin has begun."

And while she spoke, she went on with her sewing as calmly as you
please. How could he suspect what was happening? He couldn't hear the
guns at the fortifications. He couldn't see the city in its fear and
sorrow.

From his bed he could see one side of the Arc de Triomphe, and his room
was filled with odds and ends of the period of the First Empire--all
admirably fitted to sustain his illusions. Portraits of Napoleon's
marshals, battle prints, a picture of the little King of Rome in his
baby dress; big stiff consoles decorated with trophies, covered with
imperial relics, medallions, bronzes, a piece of the rock of St. Helena
under a glass case, miniatures all representing the same blue-eyed
lady, now with hair curled, now in a ball dress, now in a yellow gown
with leg-of-mutton sleeves. And all this--consoles, King of Rome,
marshals, yellow-gowned, short-waisted ladies, with that prim stiffness
which was considered graceful in 1806, this atmosphere of victory and
conquest--it was this more than anything we could say to him that made
him accept so naively the siege of Berlin.

After that day, our military operations grew simpler and simpler.
Nothing but a little patience was needed in order to take Berlin. Every
little while, when the old gentleman grew listless, we read him a
letter from his son, an imaginary letter of course, as Paris was by now
cut off, and as since Sedan, the aide-de-camp of Mac Mahon had been
sent to a German fortress.

You can easily imagine the despair of the poor child who heard nothing
from her father, knowing that he was a prisoner, deprived of even
comfort and perhaps sick, while she had to write letters in his name
that were full of joy, brief indeed, such as a soldier would write from
the field, a soldier advancing day by day through the enemy's country.
Sometimes it was too much for her, and weeks went by without a letter.
The old man began to worry and to be unable to sleep. Then presto! a
letter from Germany would arrive, and she would read it gayly at her
grandfather's bedside, holding back her tears.

The old colonel would listen gravely, smile knowingly, approve,
criticize, and explain to us any passage which seemed confused. But it
was in the replies that he made to his son that he was magnificent.
"Never forget that you are French," he wrote. "Be generous to the poor
Germans. Don't let them suffer more than is inevitable from the
invasion of their country." And then came suggestions without end,
charming, moralizing on property rights, the courtesy due to women, a
veritable code of honor for conquerors. All this was interwoven with
reflections on politics and discussions of the peace terms. On this
last point he was not unduly exacting. "Indemnity, and nothing
more--what good would their provinces be to us? A France could never be
made out of a Germany." He dictated that in a firm voice, and one could
not hear him without emotion, there was so much sincerity, so beautiful
a patriotism in what he said.

Meanwhile, the siege was progressing--not the siege of Berlin,
unfortunately! We had reached the period of severe cold, the
bombardment, the epidemics, the famine. But thanks to our efforts, to
the infinite tenderness which enfolded him, the serenity of the old old
man was never troubled. To the end, I was able to get white bread and
fresh meat for him--for him alone, of course. You can't imagine
anything more touching than these luncheons so innocent in their
egotism--the old gentleman sitting up in bed, fresh and smiling, his
napkin tucked under his chin, and his pale little granddaughter at hand
to guide his hand, make him drink, and help him as he ate all these
forbidden good things.

Then, animated by his meal, in the comfort of his warm room, while the
winter's wind whistled outside and the snow flakes whirled around the
windows, the ex-cuirassier told us for the hundredth time the story of
the retreat from Russia when frozen biscuit and horse flesh was all
that there was to eat.

"Do you realize what that means, little one? We had to eat horse!"

Did she realize what that meant! For two months she had eaten no other
meat.

As time went on and the old gentleman recovered little by little, our
task increased in difficulty. The numbness of the senses which had made
it so easy to deceive him was disappearing day by day. Two or three
times already the terrible cannonading at the Porte Maillot had made
him jump, his ear as keen as a hunting dog's, and we had been obliged
to invent a last victory for Bazaine at the gates of Berlin and salvos
fired at the Invalides[273-1] in honor of the event.

Another day, when his bed had been brought over to the window (it was,
I think, the Thursday on which the battle of Buzenval was fought), he
distinctly saw the troops of the National Guard formed on the Avenue de
la Grand Arme.

"What are those troops?" asked the old gentleman, and we heard him
mutter, "Not well set up."

It went no farther, but we understood that thereafter we must take
every precaution. Unfortunately we were not sufficiently careful. One
evening as I reached the house, the little girl came to meet me,
considerably troubled. "It is to-morrow that they enter the city," she
said.

Was the door of her grandfather's bedroom open? In thinking it all over
afterward, I remember that this evening his face wore a very striking
expression. Probably he had overheard us; but while we were talking of
the entry of the Prussians, the old gentleman was thinking of the
triumphant return of the French troops, for which he had so long been
waiting--Mac Mahon marching down the avenue in the midst of flowers,
his son at the marshal's side, and he himself on his balcony wearing
his full dress uniform as he did at Lutzen, saluting the riddled flags
and the powder-blackened eagles.

Poor old Jouve! No doubt he thought that we did not want him to
participate in this review of our troops in the fear that his emotion
would be too much for him, so he carefully avoided speaking of it. But
the next day, at the very minute when the Prussian battalions started
on their march from the Porte Maillot to the Tuileries,[274-1] the
window up there opened gently and the Colonel appeared on the balcony
wearing his helmet, his saber and all the old-fashioned but still
glorious regalia of one of Milhaud's cuirassiers.

I still wonder what will power, what spurt of vitality it had taken to
put him on his feet again in all the trappings of war. At all events,
there he was, standing erect behind the rail, surprised to find the
avenues so large, so silent, the window curtains down, and Paris as
gloomy as a great pesthouse; flags everywhere, but such strange flags
bearing a red cross on a white field, and no crowd to meet our
soldiers.

For an instant he thought he might be mistaken; but no, below, behind
the Arc de Triomphe, there came an indistinct rattle and then a black
line advanced in the early light. Then, little by little, the eagles on
the tops of helmets could be seen shining in the sun, the little drums
of Jena began to beat, and under the Arc de L'Etoile, accented by the
heavy tread of marching men and by the clash of sidearms, Schubert's
Triumphal March burst out.

Suddenly the silence of the Place de L'Etoile was broken by a terrible
cry: "To arms! To arms! The Prussians!" And the four Uhlans[275-1] at
the head of the column could see up there on the balcony a tall old man
stagger and fall. This time Colonel Jouve was really dead.




SELMA LAGERLOeF

The Silver Mine


King Gustav the Third[276-1] was making a hurried trip through Dalarna.
Though the horses seemed to be fairly skimming the ground, the King was
dissatisfied. He leaned out of the window continually urging the driver
to make haste, and his courtiers expected any minute that the royal
coach or harness would break.

Finally the carriage tongue did indeed break. The courtiers leaped from
the coach and after a hasty inspection said that it would be impossible
to continue the journey without repairs. Anxious for the King's
entertainment, they asked him if he would not like to attend the
services in a little church which could be seen a short distance ahead.

The King agreed, and stepping into one of the other carriages, drove to
the church. For hours he had been riding through large tracts of
forest, so he was the more delighted to come out in view of green
fields and small hamlets. The Dalelven sparkled forth, as it glided
between masses of graceful willows.

The King, however, was unable to attend the service, for just as he
stepped from the carriage to the churchyard, the sexton was ringing the
bell for the closing. The worshippers came filing out of the church. As
they passed the King, where he stood with one foot on the carriage
step, he was impressed with their stalwart bearing and sturdy,
wholesome appearance.

On the preceding day the King had remarked to his courtiers upon the
poverty of the country they were passing through. "Apparently now," he
said, "I am driving through the poorest section of my domain." When he
saw these people, however, he forgot about the poverty of the country.
His heart warmed within him and he said to himself, "The Swedish King
is not in such poor circumstances as some of his enemies would believe.
As long as my subjects remain as fine and wholesome as these are, I
shall be able to defend successfully my crown and my land."

Then he commanded a courtier to tell the people that the stranger among
them was their King, and that he wished them to gather around in order
that he might address them.

He spake to them, standing upon the top step that led into the
sanctuary, and the step upon which he stood may be found there to this
day.

The King first told his people how matters stood within the kingdom.
Sweden had been attacked by both Russia and Denmark. Under ordinary
circumstances this would not be alarming, but at present the army was
so filled with traitors[277-1] that he could hardly depend on it. He
saw, therefore, no alternative but to go out himself to the small towns
and ask his subjects whether they wished to side with the traitors or
were willing to help the King with soldiers and money to save the
Fatherland.

While he was making this earnest appeal, the sturdy peasants stood
attentively before him, making no comment, nor giving any sign as to
whether they agreed or not. Now the King had felt inwardly pleased at
the forcefulness of his own appeal, so when the men stood silent,
unable to give their answer, he frowned and showed his disappointment.

The farmers understood that the King was impatient for their reply, and
at length one stepped forward. "Now you must know, King Gustav," he
said, "that we were not expecting a visit from our King here to-day. We
are therefore not prepared to answer you immediately. I would suggest
that you go into the sanctuary and speak with our minister while we
discuss among ourselves this matter which you have presented to us."

The King, perceiving that no better solution was possible, decided to
take the farmer's advice.

When he entered the study, he found no one there except an old farmer.
He was tall and rough, with hands large and horny from hard work. He
wore neither robe nor collar, but only leather breeches and a long
white homespun coat, like the other peasants. He arose and bowed as the
King entered.

"I believed that I should meet the minister here," said the King.

The other reddened with embarrassment, for he realized that it might be
annoying to the King to be told that he had mistaken the minister for a
farmer.

"Yes," he admitted, "the pastor is usually found here."

The King seated himself in a large armchair that stood in the study at
that time, and which still stands there with a single change; the
congregation has placed upon the back a gold crown.

"Have you a good minister here?" asked the King, wishing to show
interest in the people's welfare.

When the King questioned him thus, the pastor felt that it was
impossible to admit who he was. He decided that it was better to let
the King think he was only a farmer, so he answered: "The minister is
fair; he preaches the clear word of God, and he tries to live as he
preaches."

The King thought this a good recommendation. His sharp ear, however,
had detected a certain hesitation in the tone of the man. He said,
therefore, "It sounds, though, as if you are not entirely satisfied
with your pastor."

"He may be a bit hardheaded," said the other, thinking inwardly, "If
the King should later discover who I am, he will realize that I did not
pour compliments over myself." He decided, therefore, to come out with
a bit of criticism. "There be those who would say that the minister is
inclined to want to be the ruler in this hamlet," he continued.

"Then he has surely directed and managed everything in the best
possible way," said the King. He was not pleased to have the farmer
finding fault with some one placed over him. "It appears to me that
everything here is ruled by good habit and old-fashioned simplicity."

"The people are good," said the minister, "because they live in a
remote place in isolation and poverty. The people here would probably
be no better than others if the trials and temptations of the world
came nearer to them."

"There is little chance that this will happen," said the King with a
shrug of his shoulder.

He said nothing further but began drumming on the table with his
fingers. He felt that he had exchanged enough words with this farmer,
and wondered when the people would be ready with their answer.

"Those peasants are not very eager about coming to their King with
aid," he thought. "If my coach were only ready, I would drive away from
them and their deliberations."

The minister, deeply troubled, strove within himself as to how he
should act on an important question that must be settled quickly. He
felt glad that he had not told the King who he was, for now he could
discuss matters that otherwise he would have been unable to bring
forward.

After a time he broke the embarrassing silence by asking the King if it
really were true that enemies were besieging them and their kingdom was
in danger.

The King, feeling that this person should have sense enough to leave
him undisturbed, looked at him for a time without reply.

"I asked the question because, standing within the study here, I could
not hear clearly what you said to the people. But in case it is true, I
should like to state that the pastor of this parish might possibly be
in a position to furnish the King as much money as he would need."

"I thought you said that every one here was poor," said the King,
thinking that the farmer did not know what he was talking about.

"Yes, that is true," agreed the pastor, "and the minister has no more
than any other. But if the King will honor me by listening, I will
explain how it is that the minister has power to help."

"You may speak," said King Gustav. "You seem to find it easier to
express yourself than your friends and neighbors outside, who never
will be ready with their answer."

"It is not an easy matter to answer a King. I fear that, in the end, it
will be necessary for their pastor to speak in their stead."

The King crossed his knees, folded his arms, and dropped his head. "You
may begin," he said, with an air of preparing to fall asleep.

"Once upon a time the pastor and four men from his parish went elk
hunting," began the minister. "Besides the pastor, there were two
soldiers, Olaf and Erik Svard, the landlord of the village, and a
farmer named Israels Pers Perssons."

"Should not mention so many names," grumbled the King, as he shifted
his head a bit.

"The men were good hunters and usually had good luck, but this day they
traveled far without getting any game. At last they gave up the hunt
and sat down on the ground to talk. They remarked upon the strange fact
that so large a section of the country should be unsuitable for
cultivation. All was rocks, hills, or morass.

"'Our Lord has not done right by us, when he has given us such poor
land to live in,' said one of them. 'In other sections people have
riches and plenty, but here in spite of all our efforts we can hardly
get sufficient for our daily needs.'"

The minister stopped a moment as if uncertain whether the King had
heard him. The King, however, moved his little finger as a sign that he
was still awake.

"As the hunters were talking of their ill fortune, the minister noticed
something glittering where he had overturned a bit of moss with his
boot. 'This is a remarkable mountain,' he thought. Overturning more of
the moss and picking up a piece of stone that clung to it, he
exclaimed, 'Can it be possible that this is lead ore!'

"The others came eagerly over to the speaker and began uncovering the
rock with their rifle stocks. They thus exposed a broad mineral vein on
the side of the mountain.

"'What do you suppose this is?' asked the minister.

"Each man broke loose a piece of the rock and, biting it as a crude
test, said he thought it should be at least zinc or lead.

"'And the whole mountain is full of it,' eagerly ventured the
landlord."

When the minister had reached this stage of the story, the King
slightly raised his head and partly opened one eye.

"Do you know if any of these persons had any knowledge of minerals or
geology?"

"No, they did not," answered the minister. Whereupon the King's head
sank and both eyes closed.

"The minister and those with him were highly pleased," continued the
pastor, undisturbed by the King's indifference. "They believed that
they had found something which would enrich not only themselves, but
their posterity as well.

"'Nevermore shall I need to work,' said one of them. 'I can do nothing
the whole week through and on Sunday I shall ride to church in a gold
chariot.'

"These were usually men of good sense, but their great discovery had
gone to their heads, so that now they spoke like children. They had
enough presence of mind, however, to lay the moss carefully back in
place so as to hide the mineral vein. Then, after taking careful note
of the location, they journeyed home.

"Before parting, they all agreed that the minister should go to Falun
and ask the mineralogist there what kind of ore this might be. He was
to return as soon as possible, and until then they all swore by a
binding oath that they would not reveal to any person the location of
the ore."

The king slightly raised his head but did not interrupt the narrative.
He began to believe apparently that the man really had something
important to tell, though he did not permit himself to be aroused out
of his indifference.

"The minister started upon his journey with a few samples of ore in his
pocket. He was just as happy in the thought of becoming wealthy as any
of the others were. He mused upon how he would repair the parsonage
that now was no better than a cottage; and how he could marry the
daughter of the bishop, as he had long desired. Otherwise he would be
compelled to wait for her many years, for he was poor and obscure, and
he knew it would be a long time before he would be assigned to a place
that would enable him to marry the girl of his choice.

"The minister's journey to Falun took him two days. There he was
compelled to wait a day for the return of the mineralogist. When he
finally showed the samples of the ore, the man took them in his hand,
looked at them, and then at the stranger. The minister told the story
of how he had found these samples in the vicinity of his home, and
asked if they might be lead.

"'No, it is not lead.'

"'Zinc, then?' faltered the minister.

"'No, neither is it zinc.'

"All hope sank within the breast of the minister. He had not felt so
downcast in many a day.

"'Do you have many stones like these in your country?' asked the
mineralogist.

"'We have a whole mountain,' answered the minister.

"Then the man advanced toward the minister and slapping him on the
shoulder said, 'Let us see that you make such use of it that will bring
great good both to you and to our Kingdom, for you have found silver.'"

"'Is that true?' said the minister rather dazed; 'so it is silver?'

"The mineralogist explained to him what he should do in order to obtain
legal rights to the mine, and gave him much good advice, also. The
minister, however, stood bewildered and heard not a word that was said.
He thought only of the wonderful news that back home in his poor
neighborhood lay a whole mountain of silver ore waiting for him."

The King raised his head so suddenly that the minister broke off the
narrative. "I suppose when the minister came home and began working the
mine he found that the mineralogist had misinformed him."

"No," said the minister, "it was as the man had said."

"You may continue," and the King settled himself again to listen.

"When the minister reached home, the first thing he did was to start
out to tell his comrades of the value of their find. As he drove up to
Landlord Stensson's place, where he had intended to go in and inform
his friend that they had found silver, he paused at the gate, for he
saw that white sheets had been hung before the windows and a broad path
of hemlock boughs led up to the door step."

"'Who has died here?' inquired the minister of a little boy who stood
leaning against the fence.

"'It is the landlord himself.' Then he told the minister that for a
week past the landlord had been drinking ever and ever so much liquor,
until he was drunk all the time.

"'How can that be?' asked the pastor. 'The landlord never before drank
to excess.'

"'Well, you see,' said the boy, 'he drank because he was possessed with
the idea that he had found a mine. He was so rich, he said, that he
would never need to do anything now but drink. Last night he drove out,
drunk as he was, and fell out of the carriage and was killed.'

"After the minister had heard all this, he started homeward, grieving
over what he had learned. And only a moment before he had been so
elated over the good news he had to tell his friends.

"When the minister had gone a short distance, he met Israels Pers
Persson walking along the road. He appeared as usual and the minister
was glad that their good fortune had not turned his head. He would
immediately gladden him with the news that he was now a rich man.

"'Good-day!' said the minister.

"'Do you come now from Falun?'

"'Yes, and I can tell you that things turned out better than we
thought. The mineralogist said that it was silver ore.'

"Pers Persson looked as if the earth had opened to engulf him. 'What is
it you say? Is it silver?'

"'Yes, we shall all be rich men now and able to live as royalty.'

"'Oh, is it silver?' repeated Pers Persson, in still greater dejection.

"'It certainly is silver,' said the minister. 'Don't think that I would
deceive you. You should not be afraid of being glad.'

"'Glad!' said Pers Persson, 'should I be glad? I thought it was fool's
gold, so it seemed better to take a certainty for an uncertainty. I
sold my share in the mine to Olaf Svard for one hundred dollars.'

"He looked very downhearted, and the minister left him standing there
with tears in his eyes.

"When the minister reached home, he sent a servant to Olaf Svard and
his brother asking them to come to the manse that he might tell them
the nature of their find. He felt that he had had enough of trying to
spread the good news himself.

"But that evening, as the minister sat alone, joy again filled his
heart. He went out and stood upon a hillock where he had decided to
build the new parsonage. This, of course, should be very grand, as
grand as the bishop's home itself. He was not satisfied, moreover, with
the idea of repairing the old church. It occurred to him that, as there
was so much wealth in the hamlet, many people would find their way to
the place, until finally a large town would probably be built around
the mine. He reasoned that it would be necessary then to build a large
new church in place of the old one, which would require a great portion
of his riches. Neither could he stop here in his dreams, for he thought
that when the time came to dedicate this grand new church, the King and
many bishops would be there. The King would be glad to see such a
church, but he would remark that there were not fit accommodations to
be had in the town. It would be necessary, therefore, to build a castle
in the city."

At this point one of the King's courtiers opened the door of the study
and announced that the King's coach had been repaired.

The King thought at first that he would depart immediately but,
reconsidering, he said to the minister, "You may continue your story to
the end, but make it shorter. We know how the man dreamed and thought;
now we want to know what he did."

"While the minister sat in the midst of his dreams," went on the
speaker, "word came to him that Israels Pers Perrson had taken his life.
He could not endure the thought of his folly in selling his share of
the mine. He felt he would be unable to live and see from day to day
another enjoy the wealth that might have been his."

The King moved slightly in his chair. He now had both eyes wide open.
"Methinks," said he, "that had I been this minister, I should have had
enough of that mine."

"The King is a rich man; at least he has plenty. It was not so with the
minister, who owned nothing. This poor man, when he saw that God's
blessing appeared not to be with his undertaking, thought: 'I shall not
dream further about making myself prosperous and useful with these
riches. I cannot let the silver mine lie in the ground, however; I must
take out the ore for the poor and needy. I will work the silver mine to
help put the whole community on its feet.'

"One day the minister went over to Olaf Svard's to talk with him and
his brother about the best disposal of the mine. When he came near the
soldier's home, he met a cart surrounded by awe-stricken farmers.
Within the cart sat a man, his feet bound with a rope and his hands
behind him.

"As the minister passed, the cart stopped, giving the minister an
opportunity to observe the prisoner more closely. His head was bound
around so that it was hard to see him, but the minister thought he
recognized Olaf Svard. He heard the prisoner pleading with the guards
to let him speak with the minister.

"As he came closer to the cart, the prisoner turned towards him,
saying, 'You will soon be the only one who knows where the silver mine
is.'

"'What is that you say, Olaf?'

"'You see, minister, since we heard that it is a silver mine we have
found, my brother and I have not remained such good friends as
formerly. We often have come to disputes, and last night we had an
argument over which one of us five first found the mine. We came to
blows, and I have killed my brother and he has given me a deep mark on
my forehead.[290-1] I shall hang now and you will then be the only one
who knows the site of the mine. I should like to request something of
you.'

"'Speak up,' said the minister. 'I will do all in my power for you.'

"'You know I shall leave several little children behind me,' said the
soldier.

"'So far as that is concerned,' interrupted the minister, 'you may rest
easy. Whatever is your share they shall have.'

"'No,' said Olaf, 'it is another thing I wanted to ask of you. Do not
let them have any part of that which comes out of the mine.'

"The minister fell back a few steps, then remained motionless, unable
to reply.

"'If you do not promise me this, I cannot die in peace.'

"The minister at last promised reluctantly, and the cart continued on
its way, bearing the murderer to his doom.

"The minister stood there in the road, deliberating on how he should
keep the promise he had just given. All the way home he thought over
the riches which he had expected would bring such joy.

"'If it should prove,' he mused, 'that the people of this parish are
unable to endure wealth, since already four have died who had been
strong practical men, ought I not to give up the idea of working the
mine?' He pictured his whole parish going to destruction because of the
silver. Would it be right that he, who was placed as a guardian over
the souls of these poor people, should put into their hands something
which might be the cause of their ruin?"

The King raised himself upright in his chair and stared at the speaker.
"I might say that you give me to understand that the pastor of this
isolated community must be a real man."

"But this that I have related was not all," continued the minister,
"for as soon as the news of the mine spread over the neighboring
parishes, workers ceased to labor and went about light-heartedly,
awaiting the time when the great riches should pour in on them. All
idlers in that section roamed into the hamlet. Drunkenness, quarreling,
and fighting became constant problems for the minister's solution. Many
people did nothing but wander around through fields and forest looking
for the mine. The minister noted, also, that as soon as he left home,
men spied upon him to see whether he visited the silver mine, so that
they might steal the secret of its location from him.

"When things had come to this pass, the minister called the farmers to
a meeting. He reminded them of the many tragedies that the discovery of
the silver mine had brought to their community and asked if they were
going to allow themselves to be ruined or if they wished to save
themselves. And then he asked if they wanted him, who was their pastor,
to contribute to their ruin. He himself had decided that he would not
reveal to anyone the location of the mine, nor would he ever attempt to
derive any wealth therefrom.

"He then asked the farmers how they would vote for the future. If they
desired to continue seeking after the mine and awaiting riches, he
intended to go so far from them that no news of their misery would ever
reach him. If, on the other hand, they would give up thinking of the
silver mine, he would remain among them. 'But however you choose,'
repeated the minister, 'remember that no one will ever hear from me any
information about the location of the silver mine.'"

"Well," said the King, "what did the farmers decide?"

"They did as the minister desired of them. They understood that he
meant well for them when he was willing to remain in poverty for their
sake. They urged him to go to the forest and take every precaution to
conceal the vein so that no one would ever find it."

"Since then the minister has remained here as poor as the others?"

"Yes, as poor as the others."

"Has he, in spite of this, married and built a new parsonage?"

"No, he has not had the means. He lives in the same old place."

"That is a beautiful story," said the King, bending his head.

The minister stood silent before the King. In a few minutes the latter
continued: "Was it of the silver mine that you were thinking when you
said that the minister here could furnish me with as much money as I
should need?"

"Yes," said the other.

"But I can't put thumb-screws on him; and how otherwise could I bring a
man like him to show me the mine--a man who has forsaken his beloved
and all material blessings?"

"That is another matter," said the minister. "If it is the Fatherland
that needs help, he will undoubtedly give up the secret."

"Do I have your assurance for that?"

"Yes, I will answer for it."

"Does he not care, then, how it goes with his parishioners?"

"That shall stand in God's hands."

The King arose from his chair and walked over to the window. He stood
for a moment observing the people outside. The longer he stood, the
clearer his large eyes glistened. His whole stature seemed to expand.

"You may present my compliments to the minister of this parish," said
the King, "and say to him that there is given no more beautiful sight
to Sweden's King than to see such a people as these."

Thereupon the King turned from the window and looked smilingly at the
minister. "Is it true that the minister of this parish is so poor that
he takes off his black robe as soon as the service is over and dresses
as one of the peasants?"

"Yes, he is as poor as that," said the minister, and a flush of
embarrassment spread over his rough but noble face.

The King again stepped to the window. He apparently was in his best
mood. All that was great and noble within him had been awakened. "He
shall let the silver mine rest in peace. Since through all his life he
has starved and worked to perfect a people such as these, he shall be
permitted to keep them as they are."

"But if the kingdom is in danger----"

"The kingdom is better served with men than with money." When he had
said these words, the King shook hands with the minister and stepped
out of the study.

Outside stood the people, as impassive as when he went in. But when the
King came down the steps, one of the farmers approached him.

"Have you talked with our minister?"

"Yes, I have talked with him."

"Then you have also received answer from us," said the farmer.

"Yes, I have received your answer."

--_Translated from the Swedish by_ C. Frederick Carlson.



